I’ll admit that I’m as shocked she didn’t delete it every bit as much as I’m shocked she said it in the first place. Liberal columnist, LGBT activist, and CNN contributor of “hands-up, don’t-shoot” infamy, Sally Kohn may have managed to secure the title of the “Single Worst Tweet of the Coronavirus Era” with this doozy:

I'm really tired of reading how business owners are "forced" to layoff workers. No one made them do that. They *chose* to do that. Not saying it isn't a hard choice, during a hard time, but to say they were *forced* obscures their agency AND casts owners/CEOs as the victims. — Sally Kohn (@sallykohn) April 9, 2020

People say dumb things. I say dumb things, you say dumb things. Granted, if we had over 115,000 people following our social media feed, we might think things through a bit more, but still the point stands. Everyone has bad moments. But the depths of this bad is really something to behold.

To pick any group of people at random to be really upset with in the midst of the global pandemic, whether it’s the communist liars who infected the world, the bumbling politicians who haven’t reacted as quickly or rationally as we’d like, the experts whose models change every five seconds, or even the media that have shamelessly fanned the flames of hysteria and often appear as though they’re rooting for the virus and the captive audience it facilitates, seems like almost an guaranteed bullseye no matter where you strike.

But Kohn went with “business owners.” It almost seems too absurd to not be a parody account. Someone has to be framing her. But I checked it multiple times. A hacking perhaps? Not possible, because she continued defending it:

Oh Lordy, Twitter. Grasp the nuance of what I'm saying. I am NOT saying that it's not a hard, sometimes impossible decision. But it's still a DECISION. A CHOICE. Think about the meaning/implications of the word forced. No one is literally being forced to layoff workers. — Sally Kohn (@sallykohn) April 9, 2020

I know Kenny Rogers recently passed, but someone please help this lady know when to fold ‘em. This isn’t a matter of people not understanding your “nuance,” Ms. Kohn. It’s a matter of you saying something indefensibly ignorant.

The business owners did not choose to shut down. They didn’t choose to cash it all in, leave their workers high and dry, and skate with the company profits to Bermuda. That isn’t what happened here at all. The government forcibly closed the business’s doors, or at best left the side door open a sliver, allowing in 1 customer in the place of what used to be 100.

This action, reasonable and necessary or not, cut off the revenue, the lifeblood, of the business. When the business can’t make payroll, what other option do the business owners have? What’s particularly gross about this is that it cheapens the real pain being felt by many of these business owners whose employees are like family to them. Kohn may not be seeing any of that where she is, but for those of us living outside the East Coast bubble, we are watching it unfold in the lives of people we care about.

For Kohn to arrogantly proclaim that these tireless owners and CEOs of small businesses aren’t “victims” of this whole government-imposed shutdown is preposterous and insulting. They are victims, their workers are victims, and their collective plight isn’t helped by wealthy TED talkers prattling on via social media about things that they don’t even begin to understand.

Thankfully, judging by the ungodly ratio her intellectually offensive post accrued, it’s safe to say I’m not alone in my indignation. Sadly that indignation will do little for the hard working Americans Kohn decided to smear at the most inopportune time.