National Economic Council chair Kevin Hassett—who wrote the report noting that a perfect storm would have to occur for Trump’s predicted growth to pan out—insists anyone doubting the president is nothing more than a naysayer, noting that predictions for 2017 and 2018 were nearly dead on. “Everyone said we wouldn’t get 3.1 percent,” Hassett said. “We’re relying on the same analysis because nothing has come up which suggests to us it’s not going to happen.”

Economists, however, believe Trump’s economy is nothing more than a giant tax cut-induced sugar high that will ultimately fade. “We’ve always said 3 percent growth for one year was possible after we gave the economy a lot of stimulus. But you can’t keep giving the economy more stimulus every year,” Marc Goldwein, senior policy director at a Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, told The Washington Post. “There’s nobody that thinks we’re going to be anywhere close to 3 percent growth a year over the next decade.”

If you would like to receive the Levin Report in your inbox daily, click here to subscribe.

Donald Trump Jr: Brexit would have gone swimmingly if Theresa May had listened to my dad

Here’s a take:

Writing in the Telegraph, Trump Jr. said British Prime Minister Theresa May has “promised on more than 50 separate occasions that Britain would leave the EU on March 29 2019. She needs to honour that promise.”

“But Mrs May ignored advice from my father, and ultimately, a process that should have taken only a few short months has become a years-long stalemate, leaving the British people in limbo.” Trump Jr., whose net worth is reputed to be $200 million and who is executive vice president of his father's business empire, also said that “elites control London from Brussels” and that with the Brexit deadline fast approaching, “it appears that democracy in the UK is all but dead.”

According to the the guy who thought the “N” in S.N.L. stood for “and,” Brexit “is an example of how the establishment elites try to subvert the will of the people when they’re given the chance.” Perhaps Parliament should fly in the second generation of the Trump Brain Trust to help them out over these next couple weeks.