Her handling of the pandemic is coming under intense scrutiny.

Americans haven’t been doing well under stay at home (SAH) orders. I believe that a vast majority of citizens have been supportive of these measures with the understanding that it would assist in lowering the number of COVI-19 cases and keep hospitals from being overwhelmed.

But as the economy has suffered and the number of cases seems to be slowing, people are eager to get back out into the world and back to work.

While every state and city have approached SAH orders differently, John Daniel Davidson’s April 13th article aptly noted that “The Corornavirus is Exposing Little Tyrants All Over the Country”. There’s been several instances of governors and mayors closing church or gun stores. But in the crisis race to be the pettiest tyrant, it would appear that a winner is rapidly emerging.

That winner? Michigan governor Gretchen Whitmer.

Governor Whitmer put into effect one of the country’s most restrictive SAH orders. As Allan Smith and Erin Einhorn at NBC News explain:

Michiganders won’t be allowed to travel to in-state vacation residences. They are not permitted to use a motor boat. Business restrictions have been tightened, including that large stores must close areas “dedicated to carpeting, flooring, furniture, garden centers, plant nurseries, or paint,” among other measures. Violators could be fined or charged with a misdemeanor, though the practicality of strict enforcement was unclear.

And the residents of Michigan, conservatives especially, aren’t taking Whitmer’s order restricting their rights. And Michiganders are taking to the streets, and circulating a petition for Whitmer’s recall, to protest her actions.

Her measures are so draconian that four sheriffs in the northern part of Michigan have gone on record saying that won’t enforce her order.

The country will eventually get through this pandemic and I wonder how the electoral landscape will be affected in states where the government has imposed stricter measures to try and tamp down the spread of COVID-19. We all understand the role we have to play in helping flatten the curve but there is no need to take away constitutional rights to do so.