Republican Rep. Glenn Grothman admitted Trump is not popular enough to get serious legislation passed.

Rep. Glenn Grothman (R-WI), a loyal congressional ally of Trump who has voted with him 94.9 percent of the time, admitted during an April 14 town hall that Trump is far too unpopular to pass important legislation when it comes to immigration.

"I think the solution is going to have to come from a popular president who can drive through the solutions that we want. Right now, our president is not quite popular enough to do it," the congressman said at the event in Fox Crossing, Wisconsin.

Advertisement Loading...

The audience members laughed out loud at the reminder of Trump's pathetic performance.

Grothman explained that to address all of the issues related to the topic, "you're going to have to get almost all the Republicans on board and some Democrats on board."

Trump, he admitted, "does not have the popularity right now to drive that through."

Attempting to put an optimistic spin on his honest assessment of Trump's performance issues, Grothman noted that if Trump's popularity "were 57 or 58 percent," he could get legislation through.

But Trump has never ever been close to that popular.

This was true from the start, when he lost the popular vote to Hillary Clinton by nearly 3 million votes.

Trump "is the only president in the history of Gallup polling never to earn the support of a majority of Americans even for a single day of his term," the New York Times recently noted.

Trump's current approval in Gallup is 45 percent, a full 12 percentage points what Grothman said Trump needed to get anything done.

Gallup's rating falls in line with other major opinion polling that shows Trump has never been able to secure an approval rating of 50 percent or higher.

President Barack Obama left office in January 2017 with a 57 percent approval rating.

Immigration has been a losing issue for Trump and his fellow Republicans. Last year, the party lost control of the House in part thanks to a series of racist campaign ads it ran across the country.

Trump's key proposal with regard to immigration has been his racist border wall, which he shut down the government over. Led by Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Democrats have refused to waste the billions of tax dollars Trump is demanding for the boondoggle.

Trump has also cruelly attacked migrant families, separating them at the border and stealing children that he then placed in cages. The abuse sparked outrage across the country and the world.

Grothman just admitted what many Republicans won't: Trump can't get things done because he has so absolutely alienated the American people that he cannot rally them to his cause.

Published with permission of The American Independent Foundation.