Sen. Mitt Romney Willard (Mitt) Mitt RomneyThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Will Trump's plan to reopen the economy work? Romney is only GOP senator not on new White House coronavirus task force Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (Utah) is the only Republican senator not on a congressional task force created by the White House to study reopening parts of the country shuttered by the coronavirus.

A list released by the White House on Thursday afternoon of the "Opening Up America Again Congressional Group" included nearly 70 senators, including all 52 of Romney's GOP colleagues in the chamber.

A spokeswoman for Romney and a source familiar confirmed that the GOP senator was not asked to take part in the task force.

ADVERTISEMENT

Trump has viewed the Utah senator, and 2012 GOP presidential nominee, as a Republican antagonist since he joined the Senate in 2019.

Romney was the only GOP senator to vote for one of the articles — abuse of power — during the Senate impeachment trial earlier this year.

But the bad blood goes back years. Romney was critical of Trump during the 2016 Republican presidential primary, and Trump lashed out at Romney in February 2016 as "one of the dumbest and worst candidates in the history of Republican politics."

The two appeared to reconcile with Trump considering Romney for a Cabinet post and endorsing his Senate bid in 2018.

But Romney has publicly broken with Trump at times since joining the Senate, including appearing critical of Trump's rhetoric regarding the late Sen. John McCain John Sidney McCainRomney is only GOP senator not on new White House coronavirus task force Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day Kelly expands lead over McSally in Arizona MORE (R-Ariz.) and saying he was "sickened" by Trump's behavior as described in former special counsel Robert Mueller Robert (Bob) MuellerCNN's Toobin warns McCabe is in 'perilous condition' with emboldened Trump CNN anchor rips Trump over Stone while evoking Clinton-Lynch tarmac meeting The Hill's 12:30 Report: New Hampshire fallout MORE's report.

ADVERTISEMENT

Romney's comments have made him one of the GOP senators most willing to break with Trump, after the death of McCain and retirement of former Sens. Jeff Flake Jeffrey (Jeff) Lane FlakeRomney is only GOP senator not on new White House coronavirus task force McSally campaign to suspend TV ads, canvassing amid pandemic Coronavirus isn't the only reason Congress should spend less time in DC MORE (R-Ariz.) and Bob Corker Robert (Bob) Phillips CorkerRomney is only GOP senator not on new White House coronavirus task force McConnell, Romney vie for influence over Trump's trial RNC says ex-Trump ambassador nominee's efforts 'to link future contributions to an official action' were 'inappropriate' MORE (R-Tenn.).

Trump has publicly lashed out at Romney, calling for him to be kicked out of the Senate GOP caucus and accusing him of being a "secret Democrat asset."

Romney wasn't the only senator not included on the new White House task force. More than two dozen Democrats were not included, such as Sens. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth WarrenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move McConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (D-Mass.), and Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump inflames red state-blue state coronavirus divide Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (I-Vt.), who both ran for the Democratic Party's 2020 presidential nomination. Red-state Democrats Joe Manchin Joseph (Joe) ManchinSenate misses deadline, but talks on loans go on Manchin to back Biden for president Romney is only GOP senator not on new White House coronavirus task force MORE (W.Va.) and Doug Jones (Ala.) also were not included.

Updated at 5:10 p.m.