One Medical, a primary care provider based in San Francisco, has begun offering coronavirus testing for people without symptoms, becoming what experts say is one of the first medical providers to expand diagnostic testing beyond those who are sick.

The vast majority of testing sites require patients to have symptoms, such as cough, fever and shortness of breath — and an order from a doctor, nurse, physician assistant or nurse practitioner — to get tested for the coronavirus. The only exceptions have been for first responders and health care workers, who can get tested without symptoms if they believe they have been exposed to the virus while working.

Although One Medical is a membership-based service, its testing is open to the general public. The company has a major presence in the Bay Area, with 32 medical offices in the region. It has locations in eight states and 422,000 members nationwide. Testing for the coronavirus is done at some but not all locations, and tests are by appointment only, though patients must first undergo a virtual assessment by One Medical.

The company said demand for testing among people with symptoms has been falling in the Bay Area and other parts of the West Coast, while demand is rising among people without symptoms who are concerned they may have come into contact with someone with COVID-19 symptoms or a coronavirus infection, or who wish to get tested before interacting with high-risk individuals.

“This is primarily due to normal seasonal decline in influenza and other viruses that cause colds, but could also indicate lower rates of new (coronavirus) infections in these areas,” the company said in a statement. “However, the number of patients concerned that they’ve been exposed to COVID-19, or concerned about returning to work, or about visiting an elderly parent or at-risk friend, is rising. Therefore, while the number of symptomatic patients who desire testing is gradually decreasing, the overall number of patients who desire (or in some cases require) testing continues to rise.”

One Medical said it has the capacity to do 10,000 tests a week nationwide, including 2,000 in the Bay Area. Given its sizable membership and geographic reach, the company’s move to loosen previously stringent testing criteria is significant and could indicate that shortages in testing supplies like swabs may be easing among some suppliers. One Medical said it orders only the amount of supplies it needs each week, from LabCorp, Quest and other labs.

Some infectious disease experts applauded the move to make testing more widespread to asymptomatic people, while others cautioned about its limitations. Generally, testing asymptomatic people who recently came into contact with a positive patient, as is done in contact tracing, is a smart disease-control strategy.

“I think it’s a good thing if you have enough tests and reagents,” said Dr. George Rutherford, head of the division of infectious disease and epidemiology at UCSF. “I think we’ll all get there eventually. These guys are just the first ones to do it.”

But experts say testing all asymptomatic people may not be the wisest course of action.

“Just because someone tests negative at the time of the visit doesn’t mean that person is not infected, because the incubation period is two weeks,” said Dr. Lee Riley, an infectious disease expert at UC Berkeley. “So if the test was done when the infection was still incubating, the test may turn out to be negative. And the next day or three days later, that person might become positive. So just a single test at one point in time for asymptomatic people is totally meaningless because that’s only testing at that moment. ... To really determine if an asymptomatic person (has the virus), you have to do the testing every day for 14 days. That’s just not practical.”

In March, One Medical was among the first wave of medical providers in the Bay Area to offer testing. At the time, it restricted testing to high-risk patients with symptoms and with a doctor’s order. This week, the company also announced a partnership with Verily and San Francisco to open a testing site in the city for anyone with symptoms.

Catherine Ho is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: cho@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @Cat_Ho