CLOSE

Volunteers at the Tuba City Juvenile Corrections facility sterilizing food and packaging it in food baskets for distribution to elders in the Chilchinbeto community through the Navajo Health Command Operations Center. (Photo: Courtesy of Lt. Robbin Preston/Navajo Nation Department of Corrections)

Rep. Raúl Grijalva, D-Ariz., hosted a live-streamed roundtable with tribal leaders on Friday focusing on problems with the way the U.S. government has addressed issues in Indian Country, many of which have become more apparent amid the coronavirus pandemic.

Tribal leaders from around the country, including in Arizona, cited how the federal government's lack of investment in Indian Country has left residents especially vulnerable to COVID-19.

Longstanding Indian Country issues such as overcrowded housing, poverty and the lack of access to healthy food and infrastructure have become more acute in the age of COVID-19.

Navajo Nation President Jonathan Nez said, "15 to 30% of our people on the Navajo Nation don't have clean running water. Yet, we're telling our folks to wash their hands with soap and water."

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coronavirus coverage relating to public safety free of charge. Support The Republic by subscribing to azcentral.com.

The Navajo Nation has been hit hard by COVID-19.

"Federal agencies are ... forcing us to apply via grant applications, which places on us hefty reporting requirements," said Nez. "Jumping through all these hoops ... we're in the middle of a pandemic."

Navajo Nation Police Department sets up road blocks on the Navajo Nation to inform the public about the curfew from 8 p.m. to 5 a.m. as well as hand out pamphlets about COVID-19. (Photo: Courtesy of Office of the Navajo Nation President and Vice President)

Critical services in Indian Country remain underfunded, according to Diana Zirul, the vice chairwoman of the Alaska Native Health Board.

Indian Health Services, the agency responsible for providing federal health services to American Indians and Alaska Natives, serves more than 2.5 million American Indians and Alaska Natives but has only 625 hospital beds.

The lack of medical resources available to these communities is compounded by the fact that American Indians have higher rates of heart disease and diabetes, conditions the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention identified as causing an increased health risk for severe disease and mortality due to COVID-19.

Another critical service lacking throughout Indian Country is access to broadband internet. COVID-19 has shifted things such as education, medical services, work and food commerce online, yet only 61% of typical reservation households have broadband access (compared to 69% of typical U.S. households), according to the U.S. Census.

"It (the internet) is now a public utility and necessity, it's not a luxury anymore," said Grijalva.

Overcrowded housing, another systemic problem across tribal nations, has become increasingly problematic now that social distancing is necessary to curb the pandemic.

"While we consider this (intergenerational living) a cultural strength and value, it offers a unique risk of exposure to our elders and other family members who may be subjected to the virus," said Zirul. "There's a critical need for funding additional housing as well as facilities for quarantine isolation."

The federal government's relief funding process places the burden on tribes to navigate the bureaucracy of multiple federal agencies like the CDC, FEMA, and the Department of the Interior. Tribal governments with scarce resources risk missing out on critical information and assistance.

The Navajo Nation Office of the President and Vice President are urging residents of the Navajo Nation to stay home to prevent the spread of COVID-19. (Photo: Office of the Navajo Nation President and Vice President)

In Arizona, the Navajo Nation, which also spans parts of New Mexico and Utah, has seen an increase in COVID-19 positive cases with a total of 1,042 as of Thursday evening, an increase of 121 cases from Wednesday.

"The Navajo Nation is a hotspot," said Nez, who added that the Navajo Nation has the third-highest infection rate per capita, behind New York and New Jersey.

Nez said he is not waiting for federal funding and resources to come in before taking action. His government is utilizing its own resources to help emergency operations and will seek reimbursement from the federal government at a later time.

"The status quo has not been enough," said Grijalva. "This pandemic, in our struggle to defeat it, has opened the eyes. Going forward ... our job clearly is to make sure that we talk about direct funding, consultation, comprehensive communications. You will not be left behind."

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/2020/04/18/covid-19-tribal-leaders-say-pandemic-has-drawn-attention-problems-indian-lands/5156512002/