CLOSE

Arizona schools are wading through a deluge of questions from parents in the aftermath of the governor's order closing the state's schools for the rest of the school year.

With more than 500 charter schools, 200 school districts and several hundred private schools, every school is taking a different approach to distance learning, end-of-year grades and canceled extracurricular activities.

The Arizona Republic compiled some common questions from parents, with answers from the state's largest districts and charters. For answers specific to your child's school, it's best to consult with the school directly.

We know that as things change, new questions might arise. You can ask additional questions via our helpline, and our team will get you answers as best we can. (En español aqui.)

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

How will students be graded?

Many schools are not penalizing students for slacking while schools are closed.

For Chandler Unified high school students, grades from March can only improve. For example, if a student left school in March with a B in math, they can use online work as an opportunity to earn an A.

Kyrene School District has adopted a similar grading system.

At BASIS schools, too, grades can only improve — they cannot be lowered, spokesman Phil Handler wrote.

Not all districts, however, are taking such a lenient policy.

Dysart School District, according to its website, is requiring remote lessons and grading students on remote work.

Will seniors be able to graduate?

Most likely.

If seniors were on track to graduate before COVID-19 shut down schools, they will be able to graduate.

On March 31, the Arizona State Board of Education passed a rule mandating that schools NOT withhold diplomas solely due to lost instruction time from the school closures.

Phoenix Union High School District has stressed that seniors on track to graduate before schools closed will still earn a diploma at the end of the school year.

Districts are also devising alternate graduation ceremonies. Mesa Public Schools is planning "creative and virtual options for graduations," according to its website.

Is it safe to pick up my child's things from school?

CLOSE Skyline High School seniors picked up their caps and gowns at the school Tuesday, knowing they will likely not get to wear them at an actual ceremony. Arizona Republic

Some schools have begun arranging pickups for parents eager to get supplies their child left at school. The supplies should also help parents as their kids embark on learning-from-home programs.

Chandler Unified, on its website, assures parents, "Our facilities will be sanitized, and we are taking all precautions, should you need to enter the campus."

Dysart Schools will undergo a sanitizing process as well, according to information on its website.

Will schools refund extracurricular, preschool fees?

It depends on the school.

But, under state law, you can't get a refund for any athletic or testing fees paid through tax credit contributions. You'll still receive the tax credit.

According to Deer Valley Unified spokeswoman Monica Allread, the district intends to provide refunds for anything affected by COVID-19. For tax credit donations, parents can roll over those donations for a different purpose next school year.

Dysart Unified officials online write, "We are working on how our process for how credits/refunds will work."

At BASIS, Handler wrote that students will also get credit for any senior trips canceled due to COVID-19.

Tempe Elementary School District has already refunded parents for preschool tuition, according to Superintendent Christine Busch.

How are districts prioritizing student safety online?

Some incidents around the country have raised security questions about Zoom, a video conferencing platform some schools use to conduct an online class. Some hackers have barged into meetings, exposing students to inappropriate content.

Allread, with Deer Valley, wrote that district video meetings are encrypted using Zoom software specifically meant for school districts. The meetings require passwords to help prevent intruders.

Tucson Unified Spokeswoman Leslie Lenhart wrote that the district is utilizing Zoom waiting rooms, so students are not allowed to enter a chat until a teacher lets them in.

Reach the reporter at Lily.Altavena@ArizonaRepublic.com or follow her on Twitter @LilyAlta.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-education/2020/04/15/arizona-answers-your-school-coronavirus-questions/2990866001/