FOX News' Tucker Carlson delivers a monologue on how leaders are exploiting the coronavirus and using it as an opportunity to get their agenda passed. Carlson said Tuesday night that Democrats are using coronavirus to encourage mail-in voting. The FNC host also noted our leaders want mail-in voting and want people to have "immunity papers" to go outside.





TUCKER CARLSON, FOX NEWS: For many Americans, the coronavirus shutdowns, necessary or not, have amounted to a life-changing catastrophe. Millions of people have lost their jobs. Families across the country are suffering from debt and uncertainty. Many of them will come apart under the strain. In the name of protecting the public from a deadly virus, we’ve wound up destroying a huge number of people. It’s one of the saddest things to happen to this country in a long time.



And yet, some in our political class don’t seem sad. For them, this isn’t a human tragedy. It’s an opportunity. As a rule, it’s the most mediocre people who are trying hardest to exploit the moment. In the long history of the commonwealth of Virginia, it’s likely that no politician has ever amassed a record more embarrassing or less impressive than the current governor, Klanrobes Blackface. As the Easter weakened approached, Gov. Klanrobes announced he’d be signing a tall stack of highly radical legislation. Mostly because he could:



NORTHAM: As we deal with the pandemic, my administration has also worked to deal with the 1,291 bills passed by the general assembly... Today we announced that I have signed landmark gun safety legislation as well as the Women’s Reproductive Health Protection Act. By tomorrow night, I will have acted on all the legislation before me.



More than a thousand bills: Gun control, abortion, ripping down historic monuments. It was like an entire rundown from an MSNBC weekend show, all signed into law. There’s nothing the interest groups that control Governor Klanrobes didn’t get. They got it all. But there’s at least one bill in the stack that ought to worry you, even if you’re lucky enough not to live in Virginia: his so-called “election reforms.” With his signature, Klanrobes eliminated all of Virginia’s voter ID laws. He signed legislation that allows residents to vote up to 45 days before an election, for any reason. There is also automatic voter registration for anyone using the state’s DMV, including those who do it online.



These are big changes, but Governor Klanrobes isn’t the only one pushing them. So-called “election reform” is a coordinated effort, as usual. The party that won’t let you think for yourself, always acts as one. Former First Lady Michelle Obama is using this crisis to promote the radical expansion of nationwide voting by mail. Citizens could request ballots online, and print them at home. No serious person has ever suggested that before. It would instantly destroy the public’s faith in election outcomes, and hence our democracy itself. But if there was ever a time to sneak something this crazy past a beleaguered and distracted population, this is it. The justification? You guessed it: racism:



KAMALA HARRIS: Without voter suppression, Stacey Abrams would be the governor of Georgia.



(APPLAUSE)



BETO: We need to be vigilant against other efforts to suppress vote like voter ID laws which are every bit as racist as the racist gerrymandering.



BUTTIGIEG: When racially motivated voter suppression is permitted, when districts are drawn so that politicians get to choose their vote... We cannot truly say we live in a democracy.



BOOKER: it was the voter suppression, particularly of African-American communities, that prevented us from having a Governor Stacey Abrams right now.



JOE BIDEN: 24 states introduced to enact at least 70 bills to curtail the right to vote. And guess what? Mostly directed at quote "people of color." You see it. We've got Jim Crow sneaking back in. No, I mean it.



Jim Crow? Voter suppression? What century is this? If you guessed this is all a complete lie, you win today’s insight award. Government ID’s aren’t racist. They’re mandatory. You can’t live here without one. Without an ID, you can’t drive, fly, open a bank account, get a mortgage, apply for welfare, buy alcohol or tobacco or hold a legal job. Pretty much every person in America has a government ID. A February 2019 paper coauthored by professors at Harvard and the University of Bologna found that voter ID laws had no impact whatsoever on voter turnout for any subgroup they measured — whether by age, or gender, or race, or party. It’s a total and complete crock.



So why are they saying it? Because voter ID laws stop voter fraud. Democrats encourage voter fraud because it helps them win elections. That’s not a guess. In California, the Democrat-controlled legislature allows so-called “ballot harvesting,” in which political activists pick up ballots, then turn them into the state by the hundreds and thousands. You can guess what happens next.



In Orange County, California during the last election cycle, 62 percent of ballots were absentee. A huge percentage of those ballots were late arrivals, meaning they arrived after election day. A quarter-million of them were supposedly cast by “inactive voters,” meaning people who hadn’t voted in the past four years. Some significant number were fraudulent. The Institute for Fair Elections found at least 20 voters whose registered address was a local dog park. Seventy-one were registered to a Starbucks. Under California law, there is virtually no way to distinguish a fraudulent vote from a real one. Result: when the smoke cleared, Republicans had lost every congressional seat in Orange Country, a longtime GOP stronghold. In other words, the plan worked perfectly.



Now, Democrats would like to see this system come to your state — to every state — and they’re using the coronavirus pandemic to justify it. “IDs are racist!” Expect to hear more of that. Weirdly, at the same time, our leaders are thinking about requiring special papers, even blood tests, just to go outside:



CAMEROTA: Can you imagine a time where Americans carry certificates of immunity?



FAUCI: That’s possible. It’s one of those things that we talk about when we want to make sure we know who the vulnerable people are. This is something that’s being discussed, I think it might actually have some merit under certain circumstances.



And fake election reform isn’t the only way demagogues are using this pandemic to erode our rights and capture our institutions. In Michigan, Governor Gretchen Whitmer is auditioning to be Joe Biden’s vice president by banning citizens from traveling to their own homes. In Kentucky, the governor sent police goons to record the license plates of anybody attending an Easter service.



In North Carolina, 100 people tried to rally in Raleigh against the state’s continuing shutdown. Police arrived, dispersed the protest, and arrested one woman. They issued a statement announcing, quote, “Protesting is a non-essential activity.” That’s not a quote from 1984. That’s a quote from the Raleigh Police Department.



They’re wrong. This is America. We’re allowed to disagree with what our leaders do, and to express that in public. That’s our birthright. They’d like to use this crisis to take it away. Don’t let them.