CLOSE

James Parenteau was booked into jail without bail on charges of arson and abandonment of a dead body on April 17, 2020. (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

Phoenix police arrested 35-year-old James Parenteau Friday after a body was found in the remains of an alley fire Wednesday morning, officials said.

Fire crews found 41-year-old Mario Galindo dead after putting out a fire near 26th Avenue and Catalina Drive, according to Phoenix Police Department Sgt. Ann Justus.

According to a probable cause statement provided to courts by police, video surveillance collected during the investigation showed an early 2000s Chevrolet Tahoe entering the alley before the fire started, the documents said. Movement in the alley prior to the fire can be seen in the footage, but the Tahoe doesn't appear again.

Investigators used Galindo's identification and tattoos to identify him. His girlfriend said she had last seen Galindo on April 13 when he borrowed her recently purchased Nissan Altima.

She later reported the Altima stolen, and officers patrolling near 34th Drive and Fillmore Street found the car on April 16, court documents said.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Officers confirmed it was Galindo's girlfriend's Altima by the license plate and vehicle identification number. Phoenix Police Department street crimes unit detectives put a tracking device on the car and began surveillance, according to the documents.

They then tracked the car to 35th Avenue and McKinley Street, police said. Parenteau was in the driver's seat.

Parenteau told police Galindo died while partying in a hotel room where "everyone was doing drugs," court documents detailed. He admitted to helping put Galindo in a white car and driving it to the alley with the intent to dump Galindo's body "in the alley and light him on fire," police said.

Information on Galindo's cause of death wasn't immediately available.

Parenteau was arrested and booked into jail on one count of theft of means of transportation in addition to charges of arson and abandonment of a dead body. He's being held without bail.

Reporter Chelsea Hofmann can be reached at chelsea.hofmann@arizonarepublic.com. Follow her on twitter @chofmann528.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/phoenix-breaking/2020/04/17/phoenix-police-arrest-man-arson-body-found-alley-fire/5155652002/