In mid-March, all Bay Area counties ordered their residents to shelter in place as health officials scrambled to keep the coronavirus from spreading across the region. On March 31, six of those counties extended the orders through May 3. Many businesses not deemed essential were ordered to shut down or limit their operations under the orders. The state of California has also mandated business closures in an order of indefinite duration, though counties are free to impose stricter orders.

Here’s a quick look at what’s open and what’s not.

Q: What’s open?

A: Grocery stores, food banks, and pharmacies, are open, along with restaurants for takeout food and delivery only. Farming, livestock and fishing businesses can stay open.

Veterinary services, pet food stores, gas stations, auto repair shops, bike repair and supply shops, hardware and other home-supply stores and home repair services, banks and laundry and dry cleaning services can stay open.

Child care facilities are allowed to remain open as long as rules limiting the size and composition of the groups are followed.

Residential care facilities for adults, children and seniors will remain open as will other nonprofits that serve the needy.

Delivery services that take food, goods or services directly to residences are allowed to operate.

Stores that sell groceries and other non-grocery products and products necessary to maintain the safety and sanitation of homes are allowed to remain open, as are coin laundries. Cannabis dispensaries are open.

Businesses that provide food, shelter and social services to the economically disadvantaged will be kept open, as will residential facilities and shelters for seniors, adults and children.

Media outlets such as newspapers, radio and television stations can keep working.

Electricians, plumbers, exterminators and sanitation workers can continue working. Arborists, landscapers, gardeners, and similar service professionals can work only to maintain habitability, sanitation and safety, not cosmetic work.

Schools can stay open for online learning and essential functions, as long as people maintain six feet separation. However, many school districts have chosen to close. Schools can continue to provide meals to be eaten off-site.

Outdoor recreation including parks, beaches, and other open spaces must comply with restrictions such as maintaining 6 feet between visitors, and many parks have closed. All shared facilities outside private residences are closed with high-touch surfaces and gathering areas including but not limited to playgrounds, outdoor gyms, picnic areas, dog parks, barbecue areas, golf courses, tennis and pickle ball courts, rock parks, climbing walls, pools, spas, shooting and archery ranges, gyms, disc golf, and basketball courts.

The only construction projects allowed are those with essential infrastructure, healthcare operations, housing projects with at least 10% affordable units, public works projects designated as essential government function, shelters and temporary housing not including hotels or motels, projects providing critical non-commercial services to individuals experiencing homelessness, elderly persons, persons who are economically disadvantaged, and persons with special needs. Additionally, construction can take place to shut down job sites that don’t qualify as essential in a secure and safe manner, and repairs can be done in buildings with essential businesses.

Residential real estate services including brokers, title agents and home tours can continue, but tours must be limited to no more than one tour guide and two visitors from the same household.

Funeral home providers, mortuaries, cemeteries, and crematoriums can stay open.

Airports, taxis, rental car companies, rideshare services remain open but residents can only use them for essential travel.

Businesses that supply other essential businesses with the support or supplies necessary to operate can stay open, but cannot use this category to sell goods to the general public.

Businesses that help workers find jobs at essential businesses can stay open.

Read More

Businesses that remain open are now required to post guidelines visible to the public and employees on keeping people 6 feet apart, including while standing in line outside, and cleaning practices. There are no specific limitations on the number of people allowed inside but people must stay 6 feet apart.

Q: What is closed?

A: Everything else. All nonessential gatherings of any size are now banned.

Michael Cabanatuan and Roland Li are San Francisco Chronicle staff writers. Email: mcabanatuan@sfchronicle.com, roland.li@sfchronicle.com