Your phone rings. The caller says she’s from the Department of Public Health.

You’ve been exposed to someone who has the coronavirus, she says. She asks whether yhaou’ve had any symptoms, and if you have any health problems like diabetes or heart disease that might put you at risk of serious illness.

Then she says, you’ll need to quarantine yourself for 14 days.

When the Bay Area finally emerges from sheltering in place, those phone calls will be part of the first line of defense against a new outbreak of the coronavirus. That defense is called contact tracing, and it’s meant to allow the vast majority of the region to return to some kind of normalcy while only those who are infected or recently exposed remain in isolation.

Contact tracing will require an army of trained workers — possibly thousands across the Bay Area and even more statewide — who will help make sure that infectious people are kept separate from others. In some cases, that will mean ensuring that people are well supported with food, supplies and a safe place to stay if they need it.

Gov. Gavin Newsom points to testing and tracing as key components of his plan to reopen California. The state is in talks with AmericaCorps and CalVolunteer about providing workers. “We are asking people, thousands of folks, to be part of this corps,” Newsom said on Saturday in an online townhall with former President Bill Clinton.

The Bay Area and California can’t afford to reopen without contact tracers, public health experts said.

“If we’re going to move beyond shelter in place, we need to be able to identify every single case and then reach out to every high-risk contact of every case, and tell them you need to stay at home,” said Dr. Mike Reid, a UCSF infectious disease expert who is leading efforts to train new contact tracing staff with the San Francisco Department of Public Health.

San Francisco is in full battle mode on contact tracing. The city already has recruited public health workers and medical students, as well as librarians and city attorney staff now on paid leave, and is training them for the labor-intensive, time-consuming work.

It involves quickly testing people who may be infected, then interviewing those who test positive about who they have been near. All of those people then must be interviewed, too. People who are sick and their closest contacts will need to isolate themselves from others, and be monitored daily for symptoms.

For the moment, while everyone is sheltering in place, those contacts are easily identified and isolated. Every new case may yield just two or three others who are at high risk of falling ill. But as society reopens — as people return to work and resume hanging out with friends and family, as their kids spend time in day care — not only might the city see more infections, but the number of close contacts will increase too, making contact tracing more difficult.

“The challenge is we want to be able to ramp up to a large scale quickly,” said Keslie Stewart, head attorney for public integrity at the San Francisco city attorney’s office. She is coordinating 40 workers there being trained as tracers. Even after they return to their day jobs, they will be available to do contact tracing as needed, she said.

“Once you open society a little bit and people start getting on public transit and going to work, (the number of coronavirus cases) could go up, a lot,” Stewart said. “So the city is ready to scale up contact tracing quickly if and when that happens. We want to be ready so if all of sudden there is a great need for contact tracers, we can fill it quickly.”

San Francisco already has 50 new contact tracers trained, in preparation for lifting shelter-in-place restrictions. The city expects to train at least 150 people in total by the end of the month. But the actual number of workers required may change, depending on how the virus behaves. If there are sudden spikes of new cases, the city may need far more contact tracers to prevent an outbreak.

Reid said he hopes that the training happening in San Francisco will spread to other parts of the Bay Area, where thousands of contact tracers may be needed to keep the virus under control.

In fact, other Bay Area counties already are building their own armies.

“The beauty and importance of contact tracing is, if you’re able to identify things early enough in the incubation and transmission cycle, you can do a pretty good job of stopping transmission,” said Dan Peddycord, public health director of Contra Costa County.

He enlisted about 70 public health workers to do contract tracing on all of the county’s roughly 650 confirmed cases, he said. They focus most heavily on sensitive populations, occupations and settings — elderly residents of a nursing home, home health aides or people who need regular dialysis, for instance.

“Without contact tracing, I think we would have had many more serious cases,” Peddycord said.

But it’s not a panacea. “Contact tracing in the context of a pandemic only makes sense with all these other community mitigation measures in place,” Peddycord said. Relying on contact tracing without continued social distancing “would be a tragically flawed strategy,” he said.

Contact tracing, one of the oldest and most valuable tools in the public health armory for fighting infectious diseases, has helped stop outbreaks of measles, HIV and Ebola. But it failed to control the first outbreak of the coronavirus in the Bay Area back in February and March, mostly due to a massive shortage of testing. Public health officials, unable to quickly identify new cases, soon had far too many patients — and not nearly enough staff — to do effective contact tracing.

“You have to have testing capacity, and we didn’t have that,” Reid said. “Most health departments were overwhelmed by the tsunami of cases.”

Tracing goes hand in hand with testing which also will be key to easing restrictions in the Bay Area and the rest of the state. Diagnostic tests that provide rapid results need to be available to anyone who needs them, at any time. That may be one of the biggest challenges facing the state over the next few weeks.

Some countries that effectively stopped the pandemic from spreading too quickly did so via contact tracing, combined with large-scale testing. Singapore, for instance, demonstrated how effective contact tracing can be, said Dr. Dan Diekema, director of infectious diseases at the University of Iowa.

“They really tracked down every single case in the country and crushed the curve right away,” he said. But once Singapore reopened society, “they had to go to wider-scale mitigation.”

The United States will need at least 100,000 contact tracers to prevent future outbreaks once social distancing measures are lifted, according to the Center for Health Security. Other public health experts say that number may need to be even higher.

Dr. Cyrus Shahpar, director of the Prevent Epidemics Team at Resolve to Save Lives, said a few hundreds thousand people are needed nationwide. “That workforce doesn’t exist now,” he said.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has about 500 contact tracers in the states, is eyeing 25,000 Census Bureau workers as a ready-made workforce, since the census will be delayed. Returned Peace Corps volunteers are another natural pool.

Apple and Google last week said they would build functions to their smartphones that could be used for contact tracing. Various developers are rushing to create apps, but they would require widespread adoption by consumers to be successful.

San Francisco public health officials said they appreciate that the success of contact tracing will depend not just on having enough staff and testing, but on the cooperation of people who test positive, and that of their close contacts.

As part of their training, new contact tracers are instructed in how to convey potentially upsetting, complex health information in a way that’s sensitive and clear.

“Everything we do in public health is based on trust,” said Contra Costa’s Peddycord. “Folks aren’t compelled to tell us information. Our approach is gentle, understanding, conciliatory.”

People need to understand why it’s important for their own health and their community that they self-isolate, even if it’s hard, health experts said.

“Every single person we engage with is helping us as a city be as safe as we can and reduce the number of COVID-19 cases going forward, which benefits all of us,” said Susan Philip, director of disease prevention and control at the San Francisco Department of Public Health.

To that end, wraparound services are part of the city’s contact tracing program — that may mean everything from arranging a hotel room where someone can quarantine to providing them with groceries and health care. Contra Costa similarly will provide groceries, mental health service, utilities, “whatever they may need,” Peddycord said.

Sheltering in place already has been incredibly challenging for many families, Reid said. Asking some people to do it all over again may be tough.

“You cannot expect a family that is living paycheck to paycheck to safely self-quarantine unless you can support their needs so they don’t leave their homes,” he said. “That means rethinking how you do welfare and our safety net. Our foot soldiers aren’t just the contact tracers. They are our social workers as well.”

Erin Allday and Carolyn Said are San Francisco Chronicle staff writers. Email: erinallday@sfchronicle.com, csaid@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @erinallday @csaid