00:35 Deadly Mudslide at Myanmar Jade Mine An accidental collapse at a jade mine in Myanmar triggered a deadly mudslide.

At a Glance More than 50 people are feared dead in the wake of a landslide at a jade mine in northern Myanmar.

Many of the missing are scavengers looking for stray pieces of jade.

A landslide at a northern Myanmar jade mine is believed to have killed at least 50 people.

Myanmar lawmaker Tin Soe said three bodies have been recovered from the landslide that occurred Monday at a waste dump near the Kachin Mine, in the Hpakant area of Kachin state. Another 54 people remain missing, the Associated Press reports.

"The rescue process will not be easy as they're under the mud, not just ordinary soil. It is really difficult to get the bodies back," he said.

Mud that flowed from a nearby lake on Monday triggered the collapse of a mound of discarded earth that covered not only the workers, but also mining equipment.

Tin Soe noted that the missing are buried under up to 100 feet of mud.

"There is no machine to pump out the mud," he told the AP. "It could cost millions of dollars."

(MORE: South Africa Flash Flooding Kills 23, Injures Dozens More; Hundreds Evacuated)

According to reports, many of the missing are scavengers who were searching the waste dump for pieces of jade when the landslide occurred, PenNews reported.

The region is the hub of the world's biggest and most lucrative jade mining industry, AP reported. In November 2015, more than 100 scavengers looking for jade in the mounds of discarded earth were killed in a similar slide.

The profitability of the jade industry has led to regulatory neglect by businesses and the government.

"Many jade mining companies do not follow rules and regulations on where or how to dump waste piles," Maw Htun Awng, a mining governance researcher, told the AP after an accident last year killed at least 15. "Then there are no actual mechanisms to watch if these companies are following these rules and that's why this is part of the cumulative impact."

A similar incident occurred in March, resulting in damage to equipment but no deaths.