Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins said Monday in a letter to Gov. Greg Abbott’s chief of staff that he has every intention of using a pop-up hospital at Dallas’ downtown convention center in the region’s fight against the coronavirus.

Jenkins also used the letter to echo comments he made Sunday, urging the governor’s staff to call the next time they have a question.

“We do not appear to have open lines of communication between the County and the Governor’s office during this critical time,” Jenkins wrote. “Instead of drafting letters, I ask that you utilize the telephone for communication and coordination.”

In a Monday conference, Abbott said he'd had "multiple and very meaningful" conversations with county judges from Tarrant, Denton and Bexar, as well as the mayors of San Antonio, Dallas and other cities in the metroplex. But he said he'd never heard from Jenkins.

"I checked and according to my office, we've had zero inquiries or phone calls from the Dallas County Judge - ever - with regards to COVID-19," he said. "Bottom line, I've never heard from him. He has attempted to communicate through social media and I communicated through a form of a letter."

Abbott said that a major general with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers had told his office that Jenkins had said he would not use the federal facility planned for the Kay Bailey Hutchinson Convention Center. If it wasn't used, the major general told Abbott, federal officials would move it elsewhere.

"That was the reason behind why I sent that letter to Judge Jenkins," Abbott said.

Abbott said that the decision on relocating the facility wasn't his and he did not know where it would potentially be moved to.

“That would be a federal decision,” he said. “They didn’t tell us where they would move it to.”

At the White House, President Donald Trump indicated no particular impatience with Dallas if beds aren’t immediately put to use at the downtown convention center.

Asked about concerns in Texas that the federal government would move its resources out of Dallas if the pop-up hospital isn’t put to use right away, he said: “Texas is so big you have some parts of the state that are affected other parts that aren’t affected at all…. We’re going to use whatever we need and we’re doing this only in conjunction with the governor.”

On Sunday, Abbott’s chief of staff, Luis Saenz, wrote Jenkins a letter, warning that if the county didn’t use the hospital being set up by the Navy, it would be shut down. In his letter, Saenz asked the county to respond by 5 p.m. Monday to the concern that the county would not use the hospital.

Saenz said the governor’s office learned from a military official that Jenkins had suggested the county would not use the hospital. Jenkins flatly denied that claim Sunday, and again in his letter.

Since the hospital was announced, Jenkins has suggested it be used to provide care to COVID-19 patients who are leaving Dallas-area hospitals but aren’t ready to be sent home.

The county judge plans to brief the Commissioners Court on Tuesday on the costs associated with the hospital, including security, food and medical supplies.

Washington Bureau Chief Todd J. Gillam contributed to this report.