Top Trump administration officials appeared on the Sunday morning political talk shows, offering a grim outlook for the next week as coronavirus cases and related deaths increase in the United States.

Surgeon General Jerome Adams, for example, said it would be the "hardest and saddest week" of most Americans' lives, adding that will be our "Pearl Harbor moment and our 9/11 moment."

Governors from multiple states also offered updates on their efforts to fight COVID-19.

Read The Hill's complete coverage below.

Louisiana governor says state will reach ventilator capacity this week By REBECCA KLAR Louisiana Gov. John Bel Edwards (D) said Sunday that his state will have more critical patients than available ventilators or ICU beds this week, based on current modeling. Read the full story here

Whitmer: Lack of national coronavirus strategy 'creating a more porous situation' By ZACK BUDRYK Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer (D) said Sunday that the lack of a unified federal approach to the coronavirus pandemic was creating a “more porous situation” that allowed some parts of the country to fall behind others. Read the full story here

Former Trump adviser says president needs to think further ahead in coronavirus response By JUSTINE COLEMAN “I know what I’d be telling the president right now would be to lift his gaze,” Tom Bossert said. “He’s looking 10 feet – and it seems to me a lot of our leaders are looking 10 feet in front of their bumper right now.” Read the full story here

Biden says Democratic convention may need to be virtual By JUSTINE COLEMAN “We’re gonna have to do a convention,” the former Vice President said. “We may have to do a virtual convention. I know I think we should be thinking about that right now.” Read the full story here

Biden says dismissal of aircraft carrier captain is 'close to criminal' By JUSTINE COLEMAN “I think it’s close to criminal the way they’re dealing with this guy,” Biden said. “I think he should have a commendation rather than be fired.” Read the full story here

Pentagon chief says military moving toward face coverings By JUSTINE COLEMAN Defense Secretary Mark Esper said Sunday that the military will issue guidance on face coverings for troops after the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommended people cover their faces when out in public to stem the spread of coronavirus. Read the full story here