The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has released a list of disinfectants to protect against the spread of the coronavirus.

According to the EPA, products on the list have "qualified for use against COVID-19" through the agency's Emerging Viral Pathogen program where manufacturers provide the EPA with data that "shows their products are effective against harder-to-kill viruses."

Coronaviruses are what are called enveloped viruses, "meaning they are one of the easiest types of viruses to kill with the appropriate disinfectant product," the EPA says.

“Using the correct disinfectant is an important part of preventing and reducing the spread of illnesses along with other critical aspects such as hand washing,” EPA administrator Andrew Wheeler said in a news release. “EPA is providing this important information in a public and transparent manner on disinfectant products to help reduce the spread of COVID-19.”

Save better, spend better:All the money tips and advice delivered right to your inbox. Sign up here

Can't find Purell or hand sanitizers? Here's how to make it at home with vodka or rubbing alcohol

No reusable cups:Starbucks will temporarily pause the use of personal cups over coronavirus fears

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says that for "disinfection, diluted household bleach solutions, alcohol solutions with at least 70% alcohol, and most common EPA-registered household disinfectants should be effective."

The CDC also mentioned another list with EPA-approved "emerging viral pathogens claims" from the American Chemistry Council Center for Biocide Chemistries. Many of the same products from the EPA list also are on the list.

The EPA says consumers should follow the directions and pay "close attention to the contact time for the product on the treated surface."

The nagency notes there may be additional disinfectants that meet the criteria that could be added to the list.

Gouge much?: Purell for $149, face masks for $20: Coronavirus price hikes are making everyone mad

How to prepare for coronavirus: The shopping list for your own home quarantine kit

EPA list of registered disinfectants

Here are some of the registered disinfectants on the EPA’s list. Find the full here.

Clorox Disinfecting Wipes

Clorox Commercial Solutions

Clorox Disinfecting Spray

Clorox Multi-Surface Cleaner + Bleach

Klercide 70/30

Lonza Formulation

Lysol Clean & Fresh Multi-Surface Cleaner

Lysol Disinfectant Max Cover Mist

Lysol Heavy-Duty Cleaner Disinfectant Concentrate

Oxycide Daily Disinfectant Cleaner

Peak Disinfectant Wipes

Peroxide Multi Surface Cleaner and Disinfectant

Peroxide Disinfectant and Glass Cleaner

Purell Professional Surface Disinfectant Wipes

Sani-Prime Germicidal Disposable Wipe

Sani-Prime Germicidal Spray

The American Chemistry Council's Center for Biocide Chemistries posted a list of disinfectants referred to as "fighting products" at Americanchemistry.com, which the website said were pre-approved by the EPA and "for use against emerging enveloped viral pathogens and can be used during the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak." The website said it was providing the information as a "public service," but notes the list is "not exhaustive" but can be used to "identify products suitable for use against COVID-19." Find the here.

Cosa Oxonia Active

Microban 24 Hour Multi-Purpose Cleaner

Microban 24 Hour Bathroom Cleaner

Lemon Disinfectant

Cosa Oxonia Active

Clear Gear Sports Spray

Foster First Defense

Sani-Spritz Spray

Don-O-Mite

One-Step Disinfectant Cleaner

X-Ray Apron Cleaner Disinfectant

All Purpose Virex

SaniZide Pro 1 Spray

Maxim GSC Germicidal Spray Cleaner

Bright Solutions Lemon Zip Disinfectant

Simple Green Clean Finish

TB Quat Disinfectant

Bioesque Solutions Botanical Disinfectant Solution

REScue Ready to Use One Step Disinfectant Cleaner & Deodorizer

Zep Spirit II

Zep Antibacterial Disinfectant & Cleaner

Zep Quick Clean Disinfectant

Stepan Spray Disinfectant Concentrate

Buckeye Sanicare Lemon Quat

3M Quat Disinfectant Cleaner Concentrate

Symplicity Sanibet Multi-Range Sanitizer

Pine Quat

Quaternary Disinfectant Cleaner

TruShot Disinfectant Cleaner for Hospitals

TruShot Disinfectant Cleaner Restroom Cleaner & Disinfectant

Formula 17750 Wintermint

Formula 17822 Deo-Clean Multi

Neutra-Tec 64

Follow USA TODAY reporter Kelly Tyko on Twitter: @KellyTyko