These Bay Area bridges and overpasses have been deemed 'structurally deficient'

Interstate 680 over Monument Boulevard Contra Costa County Daily crossings: 235,000 Year built: 1998 Interstate 680 over Monument Boulevard Contra Costa County Daily crossings: 235,000 Year built: 1998 Photo: Google Street View Photo: Google Street View Image 1 of / 21 Caption Close These Bay Area bridges and overpasses have been deemed 'structurally deficient' 1 / 21 Back to Gallery

Another year has passed, which means another detailed report from a trade association about the structurally deficient bridges of the United States is available to peruse on the internet.

As is its annual tradition, the American Road & Transportation Builders Association released its "Bridge Report," revealing plenty of interesting information about the state of California and the city and county of San Francisco.

The ARTBA (which, should be noted, is a trade association with a vested interest in increased capital allocated to bridge repair projects) conducted its annual trawl of data released by the Federal Highway Administration to draw the aforementioned conclusions.

What does "structurally deficient" mean, exactly? According to the ARTBA, a bridge is deemed such by the Federal Highway Administration if one of its "deck condition, superstructure condition, substructure condition, or culvert condition" is rated as a 4 or less on a scale from 0 to 9.

California, as a state, ranked roughly in the middle of the pack in percentage of "structurally deficient" bridges. Rhode Island, with its nation-leading 23.1 percent of its bridges considered structurally deficient, actually backslid from last year's numbers.

San Francisco's rate of structurally deficient bridges is actually lower than California's overall, with just seven total bridges in California's 12th congressional district (encompassing the vast majority of S.F.) earning that label.

In the slideshow above, you can see the San Francisco bridges deemed "structurally deficient," as well as a handful of highly trafficked Bay Area-wide bridges in need of repair.