If you haven’t already stocked up on canned beans and rice, you might be tempted to rush to the nearest grocery store after six Bay Area counties announced a “shelter in place” order for all residents on Monday.

There’s no need to panic. Two Chronicle reporters visited more than a dozen stores — from giant chains to tiny immigrant-owned markets — in the East Bay and found plenty of food to go around.

Officials are asking residents to stay home as much as possible to slow the spread of the coronavirus in San Francisco, Santa Clara, San Mateo, Marin, Contra Costa and Alameda counties. The directive starts at 12:01 a.m. Tuesday and lasts through at least April 7.

People will still be able to leave the house for food and household supplies — grocery stores are remaining open, as are some restaurants switching to takeout-only operations.

Major chain stores such as Safeway, Target and Whole Foods were buzzing with activity on Monday. Across the board, the emptiest aisles were for toilet paper, tissues, sanitizing wipes and bleach, but other essentials like baby formula and diapers were in stock.

“You can’t find toilet paper anywhere and it seems like that’s all people are buying,” Charles Jackson said while walking down an empty isle at Pak ’n Save in Emeryville. “I don’t even need it for what’s happening — I just need some toilet paper. It’s crazy.”

At Trader Joe’s stores in El Cerrito and Berkeley, lines of 20 to 30 people patiently waited outside. The chain recently began allowing only 100 shoppers inside their stores at a time for social distancing.

That wasn’t the case at Costco in Richmond, where the parking lot was swarming with so many cars it took 10 minutes to find parking. Despite the store being exceptionally crowded, staff were quickly restocking items.

Now Playing:

Some stores seem to be stubbornly out of a few select items, but it varied from place to place. A Safeway in Oakland was sold out of potatoes, onions, oatmeal and frozen chicken. A Lucky in El Cerrito was nearly out of rice, dried pasta and instant noodles. A Whole Foods in Berkeley was nearly out of tea, oatmeal and frozen bread. Many popular frozen meals, including pizzas and palak paneer, were nearly out at the Trader Joe’s, too.

While aisles for rice and instant ramen were empty at Oakland Korean grocer KP Asian Market, trucks were quickly pulling in on Monday with fresh supplies. The rows of boxes outside were filled to the brim as usual with squash, watermelon and sweet potatoes.

As Catherine Nguyen was putting groceries into her car, she said she expected more of a crowd but imagined the location would get busier as the day progressed.

“I was able to get what I needed,” she said while motioning toward her bags of produce, including onions and oranges. “That might not be the case for people who come later.”

The 99 Ranch Market in Richmond was surprisingly calm, with plenty of parking available and lines to pay only reaching about three people deep. When the last of the kimchi vanished, a worker was there to quickly replenish. Rice, noodles, tofu, dried seafood and preserved vegetables were all in stock.

In fact, smaller immigrant-owned markets might be the least stressful way to fill up your pantry. Hosanna Oriental Food, a tiny Korean market in El Cerrito, was fully stocked across the board — including coveted packets of instant ramen that seemed to be sold out at many bigger stores.

Middle Eastern markets Oasis Food Market in Oakland and Middle East Market in Berkeley were both fully stocked as if it were any other day. Same with Mexican grocer Mi Tierra Foods in Berkeley.

Specialty food shops remain an option, too. Giovanni’s Italian Specialties in San Francisco, for example, is keeping up with demand for hundreds of pounds of fresh pasta daily. Owner Tony Gemignani ensured that pastas and sauces are made daily on-site, so there will always be new product.

Janelle Bitker and Justin Phillips are San Francisco Chronicle staff writers. Email: janelle.bitker@sfchronicle.com, jphillips@sfchronicle.com

More Information Correction: An earlier version of this story misidentified the location of a Trader Joe’s and a Lucky stores. They are in El Cerrito.