Happy Friday and welcome back to On The Money. I’m Sylvan Lane, and here’s your nightly guide to everything affecting your bills, bank account and bottom line.

See something I missed? Let me know at slane@thehill.com or tweet me @SylvanLane. And if you like your newsletter, you can subscribe to it here.

Write us with tips, suggestions and news: slane@thehill.com, njagoda@thehill.com and nelis@thehill.com. Follow us on Twitter: @SylvanLane, @NJagoda and @NivElis.

ADVERTISEMENT

THE BIG DEAL—Millions wait for virus relief checks in major test for IRS: The IRS has started to issue coronavirus rebates to tens of millions of people but faces challenges in getting the payments to everyone.

“The easy part is the direct deposit payments, and the IRS deserves high grades for what they’ve done so far,” said Mark Everson, vice chairman of alliantgroup, who served as IRS commissioner from 2003 to 2007. “Now, it gets more complicated."

“The most difficult part will be getting the money to the people who are entitled to it but whom the service doesn’t have current addresses or banking information,” he added.

The Hill’s Naomi Jagoda explains why.

ADVERTISEMENT

The log jam in a nutshell:

The IRS has started to issue payments to taxpayers who provided the agency with their direct-deposit information on their 2018 or 2019 tax returns and is expected to start sending paper checks next week.

Policymakers have been encouraging people to provide their bank account information to the IRS because they're expected to get their rebates faster if they can get them through direct deposit than if they have to wait for a mailed paper check.

But millions of people have not previously provided their bank account information to the IRS, and reaching all of those people poses challenges.

LEADING THE DAY

Senate misses deadline to replenish small-business loan program, but talks go on: Senate negotiators haven’t given up on reaching a deal to add funds to a small-business lending program set up to help firms weather the coronavirus crisis after the program ran out of money Thursday.

While GOP leaders in the House and Senate have ripped Democrats over the impasse as unemployment claims spike, there were some signs that the two sides could still come together.

The Hill’s Alexander Bolton brings us up to speed here.

Fresh produce goes to waste as coronavirus snarls supply chains: Fresh produce is increasingly going to waste as the coronavirus outbreak wreaks havoc on the nation's supply chains.

Farmers are finding it difficult to sell their products and distributors are struggling to redirect food quickly with restaurants, schools and offices closed.

The news is rife with stories about farmers leaving produce to rot in the fields, even as Americans see empty shelves at grocery stores and food banks say they are overwhelmed by requests for assistance.

Experts and industry groups say the changes brought on by the pandemic, which has shut down huge swathes of the economy and kept millions at home, can't easily be accommodated by the complex supply chain networks already in place.

“I think what it demonstrates is that the food supply chain that we have set up now, it’s not set up to pivot ... quickly to address this kind of shock to the system,” Brian Ronholm, director of food policy at Consumer Reports, told The Hill.

The Hill’s Alex Gangitano explains why here.



GOOD TO KNOW

Recap the week with On The Money: