Campaigns across the country, from the presidential race on down, are using the coronavirus to batter their opponents for what they have or haven’t done to fight the pandemic.

With most Americans virtually confined to their homes and the virus death toll rising daily, politicians are betting that worried voters will reward those who are taking their concerns seriously and, equally important, punish those who they don’t believe are doing enough.

It’s a narrow line to walk, said Darry Sragow, a former Democratic campaign strategist who now publishes the nonpartisan California Target Book, which analyzes state political contests.

“Voters are scared out of their minds and are looking for solutions,” he said. “I don’t think they have a lot of tolerance for assigning blame and pointing fingers.”

A lot depends, though, on what each campaign is looking to accomplish, Sragow added.

“If you’re a Democrat and looking to maximize Democratic turnout, attacks on the president and Republicans make sense,” he said.

In the presidential race, for example, former Vice President Joe Biden wants to draw a contrast between the way President Trump is dealing with the crisis and how a Biden administration would act.

It was no accident that when Barack Obama endorsed Biden this week, the former president talked about how “Joe helped me manage (the 2009 flu pandemic) H1N1, and prevent the Ebola epidemic from becoming the type of pandemic we’re seeing now.”

Trump, though, has angrily argued that his response to the virus has been perfect and that critics like New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo should “keep politics out” of responses to the coronavirus.

With the pandemic and its effect on both the economy and people’s daily lives the nation’s top concern, “voters don’t want to talk about potholes,” said Garry South, a longtime Democratic consultant.

“We’re in uncharted territory,” he said. “There’s no playbook on how either side of the aisle plays this.”

In California congressional races, Republicans and Democrats alike are playing the virus card. In one series of emails, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee charged that GOP candidates were backing Trump’s efforts to block uninsured coronavirus patients from signing up for health insurance.

The National Republican Congressional Committee put out its own series of attacks, saying Democratic candidates supporting House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s efforts to make additions to a GOP coronavirus relief bill were putting politics ahead of Californians’ lives.

In the May 12 special election in a Southern California congressional district, GOP businessman Mike Garcia put up a TV spot charging that his Democratic opponent, Assemblywoman Christy Smith of Santa Clarita (Los Angeles County), did nothing to respond to the coronavirus threat. Democrats responded with their own ad saying Garcia wants to cut access to health care, a strong charge at a time when health is people’s top concern.

In the Central Valley, Democrat Phil Arballo is banking on coronavirus concerns to take down Rep. Devin Nunes, one of Trump’s most visible supporters.

Arballo’s digital video released Monday shows Nunes, R-Tulare, commenting on the coronavirus, including his suggestion in March that people “go out to a local restaurant ... you can get in easily” and that the media and the left are putting the country in a panic “for no reason.”

It ends with a statement: “Devin Nunes is unfit to serve in Congress.”

The ad is tough stuff, but Arballo may have to play rough if he wants to win a district where Republicans hold a 40% to 33% registration edge.

There was no question about running the ad, said Taylor Bollhagen, Arballo’s campaign manager, especially since Arballo and his family all suffer from asthma and other respiratory problems that make them vulnerable to the virus.

“We took this seriously from the beginning,” he said. “But Devin was out there telling people in the district and the country to go out to restaurants. That’s irresponsible, and we thought people should know this.”

The Nunes campaign did not respond to a request for comment.

Bollhagen is convinced that the coronavirus concerns make a perfect segue into the issues Arballo and Democrats across the nation want to highlight.

“Health care, unemployment, minimum wage workers, immigrants and the economy” are all important issues, he said.

With the coronavirus focusing everyone’s attention, he said, “this is the best time to talk about them.”

John Wildermuth is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: jwildermuth@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @jfwildermuth