San Franciscans who have been hunkered down in their homes for the last month may be getting a little stir-crazy. But when it comes to sheltering in place, they’re mere amateurs. The city’s social-distancing champion of all time may have been a World War II veteran named Kit Hing Hui.

From 1949 to 1955, Hui lived alone in two caves at Lands End. He is known to have spoken to another person only once during that time, and he lived on food he stole in the middle of the night from nearby restaurants.

There have been many hermits in the history of San Francisco, but the story of the “Phantom of Playland” stands out for its strangeness — and for its happy ending.

Hui left his home in China as a teenager in 1936 and emigrated with his father to California. After attending school in Stockton, he enlisted in the Army in 1942, serving in the China-Burma-India theater as a technical sergeant with the 987th Signal Company, one of two all-Chinese American units in World War II.

Hui returned to San Francisco after he was mustered out in 1945, only to learn that his father had died and his mother, who had remained in China, was apparently a prisoner of communist forces. His brother, who had also stayed behind in China, had disappeared.

Hui tried to carry on, working as a waiter and a cook. But in 1949, “finally I felt so lonely I decided to end it all,” he told reporters later.

He walked out on the Golden Gate Bridge, planning to jump. “But I looked down and it was too high,” he said. “I was scared and lonesome. So I kept walking and finally got out by the Cliff House and Seal Rocks. I waded into the ocean, but the waves scared me again and I went up the cliff.”

Hui found a cave below Sutro Baths and decided to stay there. He camouflaged the entrance with branches, found a mattress and stole some blankets. He slept during the day and prowled around at night.

He broke into restaurants, always taking turkey, hamburger, canned food, milk, wine (he was particularly fond of sherry), beer and cigarettes. He never took money. Employees of Louis’ Restaurant at 902 Point Lobos Ave. told police that before they installed a burglar alarm, someone, presumably Hui, had broken in 17 times in 18 months.

Hui lived in the cave for two years, until some boys discovered it while he was out and tossed his mattress into the sea. Then he found another cave (vaguely described by police as “approximately a quarter of a mile east of Lands End”), where he lived for three more years.

From the beginning of Hui’s long stay in the caves, people in the Lands End area were aware that something strange was going on out there. According to James R. Smith in “San Francisco’s Playland at the Beach: The Golden Years,” “Reports to the Richmond Station of the San Francisco Police Department began to accumulate in late 1949. Someone skulked around Playland, the Cliff House and Sutro Baths. ... Restaurants reported break-ins in more than 50 complaints.”

Trivia time The previous trivia question: What year did Los Angeles pass San Francisco in population? Answer: 1920. This week’s trivia question: How many San Franciscans died in the 1918 flu pandemic? Dig deep into Chronicle Vault Like what you’re reading? Subscribe to the Chronicle Vault newsletter and get classic archive stories in your inbox twice a week. Read hundreds of historical stories, see thousands of archive photos and sort through 153 years of classic Chronicle front pages at SFChronicle.com/vault. Editor’s note Every corner in San Francisco has an astonishing story to tell. Gary Kamiya’s Portals of the Past tells those lost stories, using a specific location to illuminate San Francisco’s extraordinary history — from the days when giant mammoths wandered through what is now North Beach to the Gold Rush delirium, the dot-com madness and beyond. His column appears every other Saturday.

Read More

Hui passed the time by playing solitaire with a deck he found that was a few cards short. When it was not too cold, he bathed in the ocean. He remained in good health, except for one four-day stretch when he had a toothache.

According to Smith, people occasionally reported hearing “eerie renditions of ‘Home on the Range’ and ‘Skylark’ ... in a foreign-sounding off-key tongue.” Hui later told his young lawyer, future congressman Phillip Burton, that one of the ways he stayed sane during his five-plus years was by singing those songs over and over when he was sure no one was around.

The lyrics of “Skylark,” which he learned in the Army, seemed as if they had been written for Hui: “Skylark, have you anything to say to me? Won’t you tell me where my love can be? ... Skylark, I don’t know if you can find these things/ But my heart is riding on your wings/ So if you find them anywhere/ Won’t you lead me there?”

At 3 a.m. on Feb. 19, 1955, the 33-year-old Hui was trying to break into the Golden Gate View coffee shop at 1004 Point Lobos Ave. when a night watchman, who had been tipped off by owner Dan Hountalas to be on the alert, spotted him and called police. The Chronicle reported that when he was arrested, he was “carrying a a modest set of burglar tools: three knives, a screw driver, a jimmy and a hammer.” Hui told police he was “glad my strange existence is finally over.”

The next day, a front-page story about the “cave hermit” of Lands End appeared in The Chronicle. What followed was like a fairy tale.

His brother Sui, it turned out, had found his way to the U.S., had served in the Korean War and was now attending Marina Adult School. He had been looking for Hui for years. He read the story and soon the brothers were reunited, 18 years after they had last seen each other.

Hui was in good spirits when he showed up for his March 5 court hearing, with a haircut and a new suit. He told reporters he hadn’t realized people could be so kind. He was staying with old friends while free on bail and had gotten a job ironing and folding dresses in a Washington Street garment factory.

“It feels good to be back in civilization,” he said. “There were many times when I lived in the cave when I wanted to come back to the world — but I’d look at my clothes and I just couldn’t face people. The longer it went on, the harder it was.

“I hope when my case is decided, I’ll get a chance to rehabilitate myself. I really want to live as a useful citizen.” He said he and his brother hoped to open a restaurant.

Hui pleaded guilty to two counts of burglary. According to Smith, none of the owners of the other restaurants Hui had stolen from wanted to press charges.

Hountalas, the Golden Gate View coffee shop owner who later took over the Cliff House with his wife, Mary, told reporters that Hui was a “nice guy. Very honest. Admits everything. Don’t hide nothing.”

In May 1955, a judge sentenced Hui to probation. The skylark he had been singing to for more than five years had finally found him.

Gary Kamiya is the author of the best-selling book “Cool Gray City of Love: 49 Views of San Francisco,” awarded the Northern California Book Award in creative nonfiction. All the material in Portals of the Past is original for The San Francisco Chronicle. To read earlier Portals of the Past, go to sfchronicle.com/portals. For more features from 150 years of The Chronicle’s archives, go to sfchronicle.com/vault. Email: metro@sfchronicle.com