The Pennsylvania mom and daughter charged with killing five relatives recently ranted that the end of the world was coming this month, a family friend told The Post on Tuesday.

Latasha Harris, whose daughter is the half-sister of the massacre’s two youngest victims, said the family had grown concerned about accused killers Shana and Dominique Decree’s increasingly bizarre behavior and another relative, Tyquilla Campbell, went check in on the Morrisville family.

“Tyquilla went there, more concerned for the kids, and they were basically like, ‘Get out of here, you’re a demon. You’re not wanted here, you’re going to die,’” said Harris, 46. “They said something about [how] the world is supposed to be coming to an end in February of 2019.”

The mother-daughter pair were found Monday afternoon sitting in a bed in their ramshackle home surrounded by the bodies of two of Shana’s children, Naa’Irah Smith, 25, and Damon Decree Jr., 13; Shana’s sister, Jamilla Campbell, 42; and Jamilla’s twin 9-year-old daughters, Imani and Erika Allen, authorities said.

No illegal drugs were found in the home, although there was prescription medication, police told The Post. Shana suffered from lupus, they said.

Harris, who lives in the same housing complex — about 30 miles north of Philadelphia — where cops found Shana, 45, and Dominique, 19, surrounded by the bodies, said she thought the family was under the alleged murderous matriarch’s sway.

“I think the whole family was brainwashed by the mother, Shana,” said Harris, who added that she thought the nightmare was a botched murder-suicide. “I’m thinking [Shana and Dominique] were waiting to die, also. They were all supposed to go, but it just didn’t go according to plan.”

Shana and Dominique have each been charged with five counts of homicide and one count of conspiracy.

They have offered wildly divergent and often contradictory accounts of what happened, with Shana at one point telling cops that the victims “wanted to die,” according to court papers.