Here we are on Easter weekend, still locked down. There was some hope a few weeks ago that the coronavirus ordeal might be over by now, but there is still no end in sight.

That’s sad because this is the time of the year for the great rituals of springtime: Passover, Easter, ancient celebrations of the renewal of life. Easter used to really be important for kids, coloring Easter eggs, a basket full of goodies, from jelly beans to chocolate rabbits, a great holiday, right up there with Halloween and a close second to Christmas. New clothes, maybe, for church on Easter Sunday. This year though, is very different. Everything has gone virtual — church services, sunrise services, and even a virtual Easter Bunny on Facebook, YouTube and all the rest. An Easter to remember.

There is another springtime ritual that is unique to San Francisco, and that is the annual commemoration of the great earthquake that nearly destroyed San Francisco on April 18, 1906. The quake was followed by huge uncontrolled fires that burned for three days and left 250,000 people homeless.

For years every April 18, people would gather before dawn at Lotta’s Fountain at Market. Kearny and Geary streets in downtown San Francisco to remember the disaster that nearly killed the city. The event used to feature very old men and women, survivors of the earthquake and fire. They would tell stories, give media interviews and be honored like living relics of another age. William Del Monte, the very last survivor, died in 2016 at the age of 109. But, in a sense, the city itself is a survivor of that great disaster, and the ceremony at Lotta’s Fountain went on. It has been one of those only-in-San Francisco events.

This year is different. We have all been told to stay home. And I think we should stay home on the 114th anniversary, next Saturday. We are in the midst of a pandemic, and the only way to defeat it is to stay home, even on days that are important.

Instead, we could remember some of the people who have been nearly forgotten in the collective memory of 1906.

I am thinking here of a classic photograph taken by Arnold Genthe of a group of San Franciscans standing outside their ruined homes watching one of the big fires approach. Genthe took hundreds of pictures on those April days. This one, he said later, was a favorite — ruins on one side of the street, people dressed in their best clothes on the other side calmly watching the fire approach.

One New York paper said the picture looked like it was composed by the director of a disaster movie. Genthe said it “was composed by the Good Lord.”

There are two couples. The men wear coats and ties and derby hats. The women have long coats and fashionable hats. A closer look reveals they were African American and lived on Sacramento Street just above what looks like Grant Avenue. It would take a historian to discover more about them. Genthe never got their names or asked about them; they were just survivors of a disaster.

There were not many black people in San Francisco in 1906, but they had a presence. They could have been entertainers from the Barbary Coast a few blocks away. There were a couple of black-owned nightspots there and a lively music scene. But what is clear is that their community was not part of the collective memory of 1906. The histories of those days mention the city’s Chinese population only in passing, and the black people not at all.

Another nearly forgotten figure from 1906 was George H. Torney, an Army doctor who was commanding officer of the medical facilities in the Presidio. The day after the earthquake, Torney was put in charge of the medical services for the entire city. A quarter of a million people were homeless refugees, the city was on fire, the water mains had broken, the sewer system was seriously damaged, there was no gas or electricity, the civil government was in disarray, and City Hall had collapsed.

Torney was 55, a lieutenant colonel, and a man who knew what to do. He opened up the city’s two military hospitals, built a new field hospital in what is now the Marina District, and set up temporary refugee camps in the parks and open spaces. He had his people dig latrines, and had them patrolled. He set strict sanitary rules and had them enforced. He had everything inspected every day. He was tough. If people didn’t follow Army rules in the camp, they were kicked out.

Histories of the Army’s role in 1906 concentrate on how soldiers dynamited buildings to stop the fire and on rumors that they shot looters. But they did not write about what did not happen: The disaster was not followed by an outbreak of disease.

It was a dangerous situation, too. Only a few years earlier San Francisco had seen an outbreak of bubonic plague, spread mostly by rats. One hundred nineteen people in the city died in that epidemic.

Torney ran what was called the Sanitary Commision for weeks until the civilian authorities took over.

There is a passage about Torney in the official history of the Army Medical Corps. “He acquitted himself very well in the face of the greatest difficulties,” it said. Torney’s record, the army said, was “brilliant,” and he was promoted to full colonel and later brigadier general. He was reassigned to Washington, D.C., named surgeon general of the United States Army, and dined at the White House with President Theodore Roosevelt.

Richard Torney, a Marin historian, likes to remind people about his great great grandfather, especially around the earthquake anniversary. “I’d say he played a major unsung role in the aftermath of the earthquake,” he said.

The only reminder of Torney’s role is a small street in the Presidio. But there is nothing to remind us of the black families who stood on Sacramento Street and watched their city burn.

Perhaps we can remember these San Franciscans on April 18 while staying at home. We don’t need to create a new disaster on the anniversary of an old one.

Carl Nolte is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: cnolte@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @CarlnolteSF