Bay Area favorite Three Twins Ice Cream ceases operations as coronavirus pandemic continues

The coronavirus pandemic has pushed Three Twins Ice Cream to cease operations on April 17, 2020. The coronavirus pandemic has pushed Three Twins Ice Cream to cease operations on April 17, 2020. Photo: Annie Z. On Yelp Photo: Annie Z. On Yelp Image 1 of / 5 Caption Close Bay Area favorite Three Twins Ice Cream ceases operations as coronavirus pandemic continues 1 / 5 Back to Gallery

For more coverage, visit our complete coronavirus section here.

The ongoing coronavirus pandemic has pushed Three Twins Ice Cream to permanently close after nearly 15 years in business.

The Bay Area-based company announced Friday it would cease operations after a struggle to remain profitable in recent years, adding that the coronavirus pandemic made things more difficult for them.

“Any chances of a last-minute solution were erased by the pandemic,” Neal Gottlieb, Three Twins Ice Cream CEO, wrote on Facebook. “As a result, we have no choice but to shut down the business.”

ALSO: 'It breaks our heart': Hillside Supper Club has permanently closed amid pandemic

The ice cream brand debuted in 2005 with one store that offered organic ice cream, ice cream sandwiches, floats and more. As the years went on, Three Twins Ice Cream became an international brand, available throughout the U.S. and inside local grocery stores. The company expanded to locations in San Francisco, Berkeley and Napa, among others.

But even as the company’s growth seemed promising, margins were slim, according to Gottlieb. On Facebook, Gottlieb wrote that selling ice cream within grocery stories proved to be “brutal.”

Dear Three Twins Community,



It is with sadness that I announce that Three Twins Ice Cream is ceasing operations as of Friday April 17, 2020.



When I started Three Twins as a single ice cream shop in 2005...https://t.co/CkqeJvgAmq — Three Twins (@ThreeTwins) April 17, 2020

To offset the cost of ice cream production, Three Twins Ice Cream moved its facility from Petaluma to Sheboygan, Wis. in June 2019 as the cost of milk and manufacturing was more affordable. At the time of the move, Gottlieb told the North Bay Business Journal that the company hadn’t turned a profit since it launched in San Francisco in 2005.

“We are striving to offer pints of organic ice cream in the $5 range,” Gottlieb said in the 2019 interview. “High rents, production costs and competition make this a challenge in California.”

ALSO: Boba Guys founder on what it’s like to fire 400 people, shutter 17 locations in a single day

Employees at the Wisconsin facility have been let go. California employees, which accounted for corporate staff, are also “looking for new roles.”

As Gottlieb announced the closure, he gave special thanks to all the customers who supported his business through the years and suggested the possibility of an entity reviving the brand in the future.

Susana Guerrero is an SFGATE producer. Email: Susana.Guerrero@sfgate.com | Twitter: @SusyGuerrero3

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

Sign up for 'The Daily' newsletter for the latest on coronavirus here.