These companies are asking Bay Area employees to work from home due to coronavirus

FILE - In this March 29, 2018 file photo shows the logo for Facebook at the Nasdaq MarketSite, in New York's Times Square. The social media company is one of many who are allowing their employees to work from home in the wake of coronavirus cases sprouting around the Bay Area. less FILE - In this March 29, 2018 file photo shows the logo for Facebook at the Nasdaq MarketSite, in New York's Times Square. The social media company is one of many who are allowing their employees to work from ... more Photo: Richard Drew, Associated Press Photo: Richard Drew, Associated Press Image 1 of / 18 Caption Close These companies are asking Bay Area employees to work from home due to coronavirus 1 / 18 Back to Gallery

As fears grow over a widespread coronavirus outbreak in the San Francisco Bay Area, a number of companies have asked their Bay Area employees to work from home.

Here's a list of companies who have taken this measure:

Twitter

The social media company asked employees worldwide to work from home.

"Out of an abundance of caution and care, both @Twitter and @Square are taking significant measures to help lower the probability of spread of #coronavirus #covid19, including strongly encouraging all of our employees globally to work from home if able," CEO Jack Dorsey tweeted.

Facebook

Facebook "strongly recommended" working from home. The company has multiple offices across the Bay Area.

"Based on guidance from Santa Clara County today, we are strongly recommending that all Bay area employees and contingent staff work from home starting tomorrow, Friday, March 6th," a company statement from March 5 said. "This decision is based on our desire to minimize the risk of spreading COVID-19, The health and safety of our teams, their loved ones and our neighbors remain a top priority."

A Facebook employee in Seattle tested positive for coronavirus in early March.

Google

Unlike, Facebook, Google merely gave Bay Area employees "the option" of working from home, unless being in the office is "critical to business continuity."

Apple

The Silicon Valley giant encouraged employees to work from home, but stated local offices will remain open.

Microsoft

Microsoft asked employees in Seattle and the Bay Area to work from home as the number of confirmed cases rises in both regions. Two Microsoft employees in Washington State have tested positive for the virus so far.

Salesforce

Salesforce asked all California employees to work remotely through the entire month of March.

Lyft

Upon learning that an employee had contact with someone diagnosed with the virus, the ride-sharing company asked its San Francisco employees to work from home.

"We are basing every step of our response process on CDC guidance, and out of an abundance of caution are encouraging our San Francisco headquarters employees to work from home for the remainder of this week," the company said in a statement.

LinkedIn

The employment service asked its Bay Area employees to work from home through the end of March if possible, and is also conducting job interviews virtually due to fear of the virus spreading.

Chan Zuckerberg Initiative

A worker at the charity tested positive for the virus, and employees were ordered to work from home through at least March 6.

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:



Eric Ting is an SFGATE digital reporter. Email: eric.ting@sfgate.com | Twitter:@_ericting