SANDY — On Friday MLS announced its moratorium on matches would be extended until at least June 8. The statement also said the league and players association were in discussions about pay cuts for players, as well as extending the playoffs into December.

The additional suspension makes it unlikely that the full 34-game schedule will be played. Regardless of when the season resumes, and how many games are played, there are big questions about how realistic it is to have fans attend matches.

During a Zoom conference call with the media on Friday, Real Salt Lake coach Freddy Juarez was asked what closed-door matches would feel like.

He admits not having the passion of the fans in the stands would be a detraction, but believes the lack of fan passion may be offset by an increased passion from the players because of the three-month layoff.

“I would imagine if it gets started without the fans there would still be a hunger (from the players) just because everyone has been out for so long. It might actually add something on the TV part because people are dying to watch sports, so maybe it actually picks up TV ratings there,” said Juarez.

TV ratings in all sports figure to see a huge spike initially once sports return as fans are hungry to watch any live sporting events.

“But eventually you have to have it all connected and have everyone together. Hopefully it’s not too long that it puts a major effect in a negative way,” said Juarez.

RSL’s coach said the players continue to work hard during the layoff, keeping up with daily workouts from the trainers and staying sharp tactically in video sessions with the coaching staff.

If the season resumes on June 8, Juarez has previously said he hopes MLS gives teams between three and four weeks of a mini preseason to get everyone back in the proper game shape to minimize injuries. That means RSL could be back training together within two or three weeks.

With the suspension continuing until at least June 8, that’s a total of 15 scheduled games RSL has lost so far.

From June 8 until the scheduled end of the season on Oct. 4, Real Salt Lake only has one scheduled midweek game. By adding more midweek games and extending the regular season perhaps another month, some of those games can be made up but not all of them.

Juarez said an abbreviated schedule that includes home and away games with all the Western Conference teams might be a viable solution going forward.