Reddit Email 2K Shares

Argentine police have uncovered a stunning 75 Nazi artifacts that were hidden away in a secret room near Buenos Aires, the discovery could be conclusive proof that Adolf Hilter faked his death and fled to Argentina. The jaw-dropping collection of artifacts includes a children’s harmonica in a box full of swastikas and a large bust relief of Hitler himself.

Argentina’s Ministry of Security said the artifacts were all “of illegal origin and of great interest due to their historical value.” The game changing find came following a federal police investigation.

The discovery could be conclusive proof that Hilter was living in Argentina after faking his death. A few months back, NeonNettle reported that newly released declassified FBI files suggested that Hilter had fled to Argentina in a submarine.

Last year, new forensic evidence from a Connecticut archaeologist and bone specialist Nick Bellanton, suggested that Hilter never shot himself.

The discovery could be conclusive proof that Hilter was living in Argentina after faking his death

NPr.org reports: The artifacts were found at a home in Beccar, north of the capital, and authorities tell The Associated Press that “they suspect they are originals that belonged to high-ranking Nazis in Germany during World War II.

“Security Minister Patricia Bullrich told the wire service the artifacts are believed to be original pieces — including a magnifying glass accompanied by a photo of Hitler holding a magnifying glass that looks similar.

The combination of object and photo “is a way to commercialize them, showing that they were used by the horror, by the Fuhrer. There are photos of him with the objects,” the minister told AP.

The jaw-dropping collection of artifacts includes a children’s harmonica in a box full of swastikas

Other chilling objects discovered include a statue of the Nazi eagle, weapons and an hourglass with Nazi symbols.

Police also found a number of toys that authorities believe were used to indoctrinate children.

“There are Nazi objects used by kids, but with the party’s propaganda,” Commissioner Marcelo El Haibe from the federal police told The New York Times. He added, “There were jigsaw puzzles and little wood pieces to build houses, but they always featured party-related images and symbols.”

The hidden area also held mummified animals and items originally from Egypt, Japan and China, according to the ministry.

Argentina’s Ministry of Security said the artifacts were all “of illegal origin and of great interest due to their historical value.”

Many prominent Nazis fled to Argentina at the end of World War II, including Nazi leader Adolf Eichmann and Nazi doctor Josef Mengele. The Washington Post reports that both men lived near the suburb where the artifacts were discovered.The investigation started “when authorities found artworks of illicit origin in a gallery in north Buenos Aires,” according to the AP.

Then, “agents with the international police force Interpol began following the collector and with a judicial order raided the house on June 8.” The collector “remains free but under investigation by a federal judge.

“It’s not clear when the items arrived in Argentina, or who brought them there. Once authorities have completed an investigation, Newsweek writes, the artifacts will be given to the Holocaust Museum of Buenos Aires.

Claudio Avruj, the minister of human rights and cultural pluralism, said, “This decision to bring these pieces to the Holocaust Museum will put strong barriers against hatred and discrimination,” according to Newsweek. “These facts show that the Holocaust did not end with the passage of time because there are people who try to keep this policy of death, discrimination, and hatred alive.”