Bill Maher

Bill Maher sometimes has something worthwhile to say.

Of course, a lot of times he doesn’t as well. But at least, in the world of liberals, one has to admit, he doesn’t always toe the same cookie cutter talking points that most others in liberal media do.

He went off the reservation again on his show on Friday night, chastising the media for pushing “panic porn” about the Wuhan coronavirus.

Now of course his reasoning was because he didn’t want President Donald Trump to win and he attacked Trump too during his rant. But he correctly pointed out that Trump is the one offering hope to Americans, that the media is only offering negativity and that gives the edge to Trump.

From The Hill:

“Now that we’re starting to see some hope in all this, don’t hope-shame me,” the liberal “Real Time” host said on his HBO program. “You know, the problem with nonstop gloom and doom is it gives Trump the chance to play the optimist, and optimists tend to win American elections.” “FDR said the only thing we have to fear is fear itself. You know, as full of shit as he is, I could see Trump riding that into a second term, and then there will be no hope left for you to shame,” the host added.

He displayed some of the headline “panic porn” with the apocalyptic language.

“Projections showed they needed 58,000 beds when they needed a quarter of that,” Maher noted. “It’s still bad. But you don’t have to put hot sauce on a jalapeño.” “So, look, if this insanity happens again, news sources have to rein it in,” he added later. “Enough with the ‘life will never be the same’ headlines. … Everything looks scary when you magnified it a thousand times.” “We need the news to calm down and treat us like adults,” Maher concluded. “Trump calls you fake news. Don’t make him be right.”

Too late.

There’s a middle ground between recognizing that there’s a danger from the virus and thinking that everyone is going to die, no one should ever be allowed out again.

Trump and the governors are in various stages of working on the reopening and people are hopeful. They can see it coming.

But media is still pushing panic, rather than rationality. Long past time that everyone involved treat Americans like adults here.