Separate sources with links to the diplomatic and intelligence communities report that Jared Kushner, son in law of Donald Trump and an adviser to the White House, blackmailed both Qatar and Saudi Arabia after his father in law was elected. Kushner then changed US foreign policy to benefit himself, punishing Qatar and rewarding Saudi Arabia when the former refused the bribe and the latter paid up, these sources said.

According to these sources, Kushner asked both Qatar and Saudi Arabia to invest in his troubled real estate empire. Qatar initially refused; Saudi Arabia agreed.

If you enjoy our reporting, please consider a donation. Patribotics is totally reader-supported. Thank you for keeping us going!

Following these meetings, sources said, Mr. Kushner changed US foreign policy in order to benefit himself. The long-standing policy of neutrality between Qatar and Saudi Arabia was altered and Saudi Arabia was permitted to blockade Qatar – despite the United States forward headquarters for CENTCOM being located there.

Donald Trump also tweeted against Qatar and in favor of Saudi Arabia imposing the blockade as Kushner changed US foreign policy to enrich himself.

So good to see the Saudi Arabia visit with the King and 50 countries already paying off. They said they would take a hard line on funding… — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 6, 2017

…extremism, and all reference was pointing to Qatar. Perhaps this will be the beginning of the end to the horror of terrorism! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) June 6, 2017

If these sources are correct, as I reported earlier, this would explain why Jared Kushner has been seen befriending the murderer of Jamal Khashoggi, Mohammed Bin Salman. Bin Salman knows that Kushner extorted him for money, and can threaten to tell the Special Counsel this, keeping Kushner and his wife Ivanka Trump, and by extension Donald Trump, at his mercy. However, public reporting suggests the Mueller report is imminent, and these sources said that Mueller’s office is well aware of extortion practiced by Mr. Kushner, and by other members of the Trump family. As we reported earlier:

“Kushner is the administration’s so-called Middle East expert, a job for which Trump granted a basic security clearance after Chief of Staff John Kelly had it downgradedfrom TS/SCI to ‘Secret’.

The White House reviewed the background investigation by the FBI on Kushner and then granted ‘Top Secret’ clearance, which it has the right to do whatever the FBI report says; but the CIA prevented Kushner from regaining the TS/SCI clearance that Kelly effectively stripped from him. The stripping followed accusations that Kushner had given names of MBS opponents taken from the Presidential Daily Briefing to MBS in Saudi Arabia, which resulted in the Prince’s torture purge of his opponents.”

It was revealed this week in the New York Times that General Kelly was overruled by Donald Trump who insisted on granting a security clearance to Jared Kushner despite General Kelly’s actions, and the recommendations of the FBI and the CIA.

If you enjoy Patribotics, please consider a donation here . We need your help to keep going!

Advertisements

Spread the Word! Tweet





Email

WhatsApp





Like this: Like Loading...