Democratic presidential candidate former Vice President Joe Biden, accompanied by his wife Jill, speaks to members of the press at the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, Tuesday, March 10, 2020. (AP Photo/Matt Rourke)

As I wrote yesterday, it’s obvious Joe Biden is fully relying on teleprompters to allow him to maintain any semblance of a coherent though.

If anyone doubts me (and let’s be real, who’s doubting that at this point?), the following video will provide all the evidence needed. In it, we see Joe Biden appearing with his wife on one of MSNBC’s morning shows. He then attempts to share an anecdote that turns into something so foreign that you’d think he’s speaking a different language.

A very moving anecdote from the Democratic presidential candidate pic.twitter.com/jmRvRROe61 — Tom Elliott (@tomselliott) April 16, 2020

Look, I could describe that video to you, but you really need to watch it to see just how bad it is. The stuttering, the losing his train of thought, the slurring of his words, and the inability to make any sense are all readily apparent. Jill Biden just sits there, obviously realizing how badly he’s doing. It’s very uncomfortable to watch.

Keep in mind, this happened on Morning Joe, a show famous for questioning Trump’s mental health. Meanwhile, they are hosting this word salad without even a question of Biden’s inability to function.

How does Biden even keep campaigning like this? There will be no teleprompters at the debates and he can’t use them when he has to do a rush of TV hits such as the one he so flubbed this morning. There’s also little hope he’ll suddenly “get better.” His condition is what it is and will only likely get worse. I can imagine how bad it’d get if he’s actually elected president. There’s no way this guy can operate at the level needed to run the country.

The DNC better have its backup plan in motion, because this can’t last.

Front-page contributor for RedState. Visit my archives for more of my latest articles and help out by following me on Twitter @bonchieredstate. Read more by Bonchie