When spring training screeched to a halt, Kyle Gibson was still in the process of meeting some of his new Rangers teammates. He didn’t even have all of their phone numbers.

Which made his request a doozy.

Brother, can you spare $5,000?

Nevertheless…

“That’s kind of a tricky test,” Gibson said Thursday after an announcement that the charitable foundation he works with, Big League Impact, had raised more than $900,000 to help feed school children impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. “I didn’t really feel comfortable reaching out to everybody, especially young guys. But the guys I reached out to, it wasn’t even a question.”

To be specific: Elvis Andrus, Lance Lynn and Robinson Chirinos immediately wrote checks. Through a partnership with Garth Brooks’ Teammates for Kids Foundations, a matching donation double the original donation was added. As a result, Food for the Soul, which partners with area churches to feed school children in need, will receive a donation expected to be worth more than $50,000.

A total of 50 players representing all 30 MLB teams contributed to the drive headed by Gibson and St. Louis’ Adam Wainwright. Those funds will be directed to teams in their individual cities. Only one other team, Cleveland, had as many as four players donate. Highland Park’s Clayton Kershaw, who has his own foundation, was the Los Angeles Dodgers’ representative.

The whole drive came together in a month. Big League Impact had raised a similar amount of money last fall in what was to be a first annual drive. The next was scheduled for this coming fall. The pandemic pushed up the need.

That was visibly evident in Dallas-Fort Worth on Thursday when a line of cars stretched nearly 2 miles in Fair Park waiting for distributions from the North Texas Food Bank. Similar scenes have played out around the country.

“There is need everywhere right now,” Gibson said. “It’s really important to me for those kids to have meals. There are a lot of kids that have no control over their situation and don’t have enough to eat right now. And imagine being a parent and not being able to feed your children. There are lot of families that need relief right now.”

Gibson, 32, was involved in numerous fundraising efforts during his six-plus seasons with Minnesota.

It was through that work that Gibson came to better understand the hunger crisis and, unfortunately, better understand disease. During a charitable and missionary trip to the Dominican Republic in 2019, he was stricken with E. coli, a bacterial intestinal infection that led to dramatic weight loss. Later in the year, he was diagnosed with ulcerative colitis, an auto-immune disease.

The condition also puts him in an elevated risk for COVID-19 infection, though Gibson said his doctors told him there has been no definitive evidence that it puts him at any higher risk for the most serious manifestations.

“You have got to take it seriously,” he said. “Everybody needs to be smart about what they are doing. I’m going to do everything I can to be healthy and smart.”

Gibson didn’t indicate it would keep him from returning to baseball, when, and if, clearance is given to start the 2020 season.

What might be a bigger issue for him: Reports that baseball is considering the possibility of playing its entire season in one location with players under quarantine. Gibson has three children, including a 7-month old daughter. He is one of three Rangers starters with children a year or younger; Lynn’s daughter is 1, and Mike Minor’s daughter was born at the end of March.

The idea of a four-plus months quarantine without family or children, well, that might be an issue.

“As an idea, in the rough draft stage, yes,” Gibson said of resuming the season in one spot. “There are some drawbacks. We also have families that are relying on us. There needs to be a way for family to be part of that isolation or quarantine. There are some things to work with.”

In the meantime, souls fed, Gibson can go back to working on preparing for a season, wherever and whenever it may start. On Friday, he will go to a 70-foot long shed in his backyard in Missouri and climb an artificial mound. He will throw 40-50 pitches into a net, resting after about every set of 15, to give him a three-inning “outing.” He will consult with his eldest daughter, 6-year-old Hayden, who will hold an iPad hooked up to a Rapsodo pitch monitor to determine if they were strikes.

It’s the best he can do right now.

“I’m trying to mimic [spring training] as much as possible,” Gibson said. “I figure we are going to have three or four starts to get ready. If you don’t keep up your strength and endurance, you aren’t going to be where you need to be when we get back.”

But, now, having helped procure meals for hungry children, it’s easier to focus on where he needs to be for baseball.

Find more Rangers stories from The Dallas Morning News here.