Updated at 4 p.m., April 15: Revised to include results of a lawsuit and an attorney general’s letter

AUSTIN — As the novel coronavirus shifts all aspects of daily life, most Republican candidates in runoff contests scheduled for July 14 remain convinced that the elections will go on as expected without the need for additional protections.

Texas Republicans have runoffs in several highly contested congressional and state house races, but none of the candidates interviewed by The Dallas Morning News expressed a need for immediate changes to election procedures.

“Our state limits vote by mail to specific circumstances and I support the current system,” former Dallas Rep. Pete Sessions, who is now running for U.S. House District 17 in Central Texas, said in a statement.

Renee Swan, who is Sessions’ opponent in the race to replace outgoing Republican Bill Flores, said her team had made “tens of thousands” of wellness calls in recent weeks.

“Our neighbors have been telling us over and over again during those conversations that they are anxious to be done with the quarantines so they can get back to work, attend church, and that they will enthusiastically vote in-person,” Swan said in a statement.

Democrats’ stance

The sentiment is a stark contrast to that of the Texas Democratic Party, which last week sued the state in federal court to demand more mail-in voting to soothe concerns about possible infection during in-person voting. On Wednesday, the Democrats and other groups won a temporary restraining order from a Travis County district judge that would allow anyone who feared that they would catch the coronavirus to vote by mail.

That order, which almost certainly will be appealed, came within the same hour that Attorney General Ken Paxton’s office wrote a letter saying that fear of catching coronavirus is not a reason to allow a voter to cast a ballot by mail.

Democrats warned in their lawsuit that, if the state did not adjust election procedures to mitigate the spread of the coronavirus, millions of voters across Texas could be denied their right to vote.

Republicans say Democrats are using the pandemic to try to advance their political wishes.

James Dickey, chairman of the Republican Party of Texas, said in an emailed statement that the party is confident that “thanks to the bold and appropriate steps taken by President [Donald] Trump and Governor [Greg] Abbott, Texans will be able to return to a semblance of normalcy by June.”

“Unlike our counterparts, we will not use this crisis to promote an agenda,” he said. “We are confident that the appropriate process for the July Runoff Election will be used based upon input from medical professionals and the election expertise of the Texas Secretary of State and her office.”

Craig Murphy, a political consultant for congressional candidate Josh Winegarner, a Republican who is running to replace outgoing Rep. Mac Thornberry, said Democrats have pushed for expanded mail-in voting since long before COVID-19.

“This is just another attempt to get what they want by using a pandemic as an excuse,” Murphy said. “It is shocking how much they try to use a crisis to benefit themselves politically.”

Murphy said the expansion of mail-in voting could lead to increased voter fraud.

“America and Texas are moving toward more and more secure voting in response to individual Democrats and Republicans calling out fraud,” he said. “But now the Democrat party wants less and less security. Republicans have the old fashioned belief that voting should require an actual voter.”

The Democrats filed their lawsuit on the same day that voters in Wisconsin wore surgical masks and endured rain and long lines in which people did not always follow social-distancing protocols to cast their ballots. In a widely circulated photo, one woman held a sign that said “This is ridiculous” as she stood in line in a surgical mask.

Justin Levitt, a law professor at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles and a former Department of Justice lawyer under the Obama administration, said the Wisconsin election was an “unmitigated disaster” in which “voters were put unnecessarily at bodily risk by a series of immensely stubborn political actors.”

Under normal circumstances, Levitt said, elections administrators should not change procedures this close to an election. But, he added, these are not normal times.

“Nobody can say for sure what the coronavirus path is going to look like in July, but if in July it looks anything like it looks in the first week of April, it will be a public health disaster to ask tens of thousands, or hundreds of thousands, or millions of people to gather in large groups,” he said.

“Because of the unprecedented scale of the threat to the ability to vote traditionally in polling places, responsible jurisdictions across the country are evaluating how they can encourage far more voting by mail than they have,” he added.

A spokesman for Secretary of State Ruth R. Hughs did not respond to a request for comment.

Democrats and voting rights advocates have criticized Hughs and Abbott for not addressing fears about in-person voting. Abbott, however, postponed the election until July 14 because, he said, people would not be able to maintain social distancing if the election was in May.

In an email to supporters last week, the liberal Lone Star Project political action committee, said Republicans are “hell-bent to block reasonable actions to allow all Texans to safely and securely vote by mail this year.”

The group said Hughs’ lack of guidance on expanding mail-in voting left voters having to pick between two bad options: “risk exposure to a deadly disease or forfeit your right to vote.”

The issue is clouded by partisanship.

Democrats have long called for the expansion of mail-in voting, saying it expands the franchise to more people who have trouble voting in-person.

Trump, a Republican, has railed against mail-in voting and Texas Republicans have long denounced it as a system ripe for abuse. In 2017, the state stiffened penalties against mail-in voter fraud to deter potential abusers. Fraudulent use of a ballot in the state is now a third-degree felony that’s punishable by up to two years in prison and a $10,000 fine.

Some GOP adjustments

But some Republicans across the country are making adjustments. On Thursday, New Hampshire’s Republican Gov. Chris Sununu said the state will allow voters to cast mail-in ballots in the November general election if the virus is still a factor this fall. He said the state is also looking at other options, such as “drive-up voting” in which a person would not have to leave the car to cast a ballot.

In Texas, some candidates don’t believe the pandemic will affect the July election.

“We’re confident moving the runoff to July that the concerns about coronavirus will be mitigated,” said Shelby Slawson, a lawyer running against Republican incumbent J.D. Sheffield for House District 59, which covers eight counties spanning Erath in the North, McCulloch in the West, and Coryell in the East. “We are all hoping this will pass well before then and that Texans can get back to business and living and enjoying our great state.”

Other Republican candidates said they were concerned.

State Rep. Dan Flynn, the incumbent in House District 2 in Hopkins, Hunt and Van Zandt counties who is in a runoff with Bryan Slaton, praised Abbott and statewide officials for “doing everything possible to keep Texans ssafe including protecting our elections process.”

In a statement, Flynn said moving the election was an “effective way” of keeping constituents safe, but added: “Safety and the health of our community is my primary concern and I will do everything possible to ensure that no one is put at risk.”

Fellow incumbent, Sheffield, a family practice doctor, said it is difficult to predict the virus’s trajectory.

“I’m hopeful that by mid-July this pandemic will be past us,” he said. “If we’re not there by July, we need to back up and take a look at the big picture. No one wants to continue to delay elections, but public health and safety comes first.”

Ronny Jackson, the former White House physician who is running against Winegarner for a congressional district in the Texas Panhandle, said he trusted Abbott to “make the best decision with the health and safety of all Texans in mind.”

“Right now, our mindset is that the runoff election will be taking place on July 14th,” he said.

Jackson said he has been in constant communication with the president’s coronavirus task force and “has full confidence that they are doing everything in their power to curb the spread of this virus as quickly as possible so America can get back to work.”

Levitt, the election law professor, said elections officials needed to take action now to prepare for a worst-case scenario.

“I can hope, like everybody else fervently hopes, that by the time we hit July it is no longer an issue,” he said. “But for that to be the only plan is sticking your head in the sand.”