MSNBC's Ari Melber opened a segment on MSNBC by mocking Fox News for focusing on a criticism of Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-N.Y.) that he found flippant, but his guest surprised him by agreeing with the report.

Melber was speaking with New York Times editorial board member Mara Gay about criticism aimed at Ocasio-Cortez over her lavish apartment residence and questions about whether it was within her district.

"The fixation on a freshman's residential choices shows the conservative energy vilifying a new woman in power," said Melber before running a series of clips from Fox News and right-wing pundits attacking the Socialist Democrat.

'It actually does matter...'

He tied the "personal insult strategies" against Ocasio-Cortez to other attacks some had used against female politicians on the left, then asked Gay for her thoughts on the topic.

"You know so many of the attacks on the congresswoman I find to be completely out of right field, just sexist, racist, outrageous, inappropriate," she answered.

"What the New York Post story did today is something different," she explained, "that we would call accountability journalism.

"It actually does matter that you do live in the district that you represent," she continued. "And honestly, it seems like this is a lot of nothing and she does live in the district. My actual point of concern is that the congresswoman has yet to address these claims appropriately I believe to members of the press."

'This is a fair question'

Gay went on to explain that Ocasio-Cortez was ignoring traditional methods of delivering information to the media, and that she was acting inappropriately. She pointed out that Ocasio-Cortez was able to pull off the shocking upset in the New York primary election partly because she accused the Democrat party boss who held the seat previously of not really residing in the district.

"This is a fair question," Gay concluded, "and it's one I believe she should respond to in kind, and not just ignore press inquiries and then tweet at will about your comment, this is actually not the first time she's done this."

Melber interrupted her in order to swing the conversation towards a criticism of President Donald Trump instead.

"Well, look at you spitting hot fire," Melber stammered out, "the headline here, the New York Times, ah, New York Times reporter backing up the New York Post for accountability journalism as you put it, that's very interesting."

Here's the video of Melber being stunned by his guest:

Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez To Conservative Critics: Bring It On | The Beat With Ari Melber | MSNBC www.youtube.com

Rather than represent the more nuanced conversation Melber had with Gay on the issue, MSNBC entitled the video on the segment, "Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez to Conservative Critics: Bring It On."