Reality TV star Khloé Kardashian told ex Tristan Thompson that she might need to “borrow” some sperm if they want to give their daughter a sibling.

Kardashian and Thompson had a conversation about the future of their family during Thursday’s episode of “Keeping Up With The Kardashians,” according to a report published by Page Six.

‘Listen, I’m just saying, True does need a sibling…’https://t.co/22F36mGzKL — Stellar Magazine (@stellarmagazine) April 17, 2020

Kardashian and Thompson, who split in 2019 after the basketball star cheated on the reality star, co-parent their daughter True through facetime. During the episode Kardashian had called Thompson to talk about what to do with True’s old toys.

“What happens if we have another girl?” Thompson asked Kardashian. “Then you have to buy it all over again?”

“Who is having another girl with you?” Kardashian responded.

Thompson noted that True does need a sibling.

Tristan Thompson told Khloe that True needs a sibling and I — pic.twitter.com/y7w8UhZRSD — Camille J Gayle (@CamilleJGayle) April 17, 2020

“Right, so I might get some embryos and get a sibling,” Kardashian responded. “I might need to borrow some sperm or get some from you, but we’ll figure that out later.”

Kardashian has recently seem unbothered by the future and has yet to make plans. (RELATED: Khloé Kardashian Appears Completely Grossed Out After Kris Jenner Talks About Her Sex Life)

“I’m not worried about it,” Kardashian told her mother Kris Jenner on a previous episode when she encouraged her to freeze her eggs.

This relationship has always been so odd to me. Kardashian and Thompson having another kid together without having sex and not being in a relationship would be the weirdest thing, but maybe not the weirdest thing to go down in the history of “Keeping Up With The Kardashians.”

Don’t get me wrong. Thompson and Kardashian made a beautiful baby girl and an addition to the Kardashian family would be so welcomed. I guess we’ll just have to see if she “borrows” sperm from Thompson.