There was a really foggy day toward the end of last week. Maybe you noticed. It had been warm only the day before, and then the weather changed completely, as if someone threw a switch. The fog hung almost to the ground. The city was deserted — the streets empty, as they has been since the arrival of the coronavirus. And now most of the buildings and landmarks had vanished in the fog. It was eerie, as if time stood still.

These days of solitude seem to have sharpened my imagination, and I thought of a book I’d read years ago. It’s called “Time and Again” by Jack Finney, a novelist who lived in Mill Valley and wrote several books that were turned into hit movies. “Time and Again” was his masterpiece, if there is such a thing as a science-fiction masterpiece. Stephen King, no slouch in the imagination department, called it “the great time-travel story.” And don’t forget, time travel is a two-way street.

“Time and Again” is about a man named Si Morley, who is recruited by a secret government agency to be sent back in time, to 1882. Morley is trained so he can live in the past. The device the government uses is to send Morley to a place that has a long history and hasn’t changed much. He picks the famous old Dakota apartments in Manhattan, and one dark and snowy night in 1970 he steps through the veil that separates the present from the past. He steps out of a room, down the steps and into Central Park in the winter of 1882.

But Finney’s hero had a choice: The government had another secret mission in mind for San Francisco in 1901, and had a plan to use a location in Marin County to slip back into the early 20th century. But Si Morley is a New Yorker, so he picks New York.

Too bad. Finney, the writer, lived in Mill Valley, and he must have known that on foggy days on the slopes of Mount Tamalpais, the world disappears completely under fog banks 1,000 feet thick, and even on clear and windless winter mornings in Sausalito, San Francisco shimmers across the bay like a mirage. Si Morley could have taken the train from Mill Valley to Sausalito, caught the 7 o’clock boat to San Francisco with the other commuters, and landed at the handsome Ferry Building. He could have walked a block and taken the California Street cable car up Nob Hill, rolling by old St. Mary’s church, past the red sandstone Flood mansion and out to a Victorian house in the Western Addition, all parts of the city left over from another time.

I thought of that trip myself. Once I got to the Ferry Building, I’d look around a bit, check out the waterfront and its sailing ships, plunk down a silver dollar for a grand lunch at the Palace Hotel and take the cable car up Market Street and get off at Powell, walk up to O’Farrell Street to a jewelry store and call on my grandfather, Otto Nolte. He owned the business; he’d inherited it from his father. He and my grandmother lived near Van Ness Avenue with their small son, who would of course in time become my father.

I’d often wondered about my grandfather. I knew him when he was very old, and I was very young. He was born in San Francisco, too, and I bet he had a lot of stories, but he died before I could hear too many.

That’s the trouble with time travel; I could hardly go up to the man and introduce myself as his grandson, visiting from the future. He’d think I was mad. Maybe he’d call the cops, and then what? And besides, I’m a 21st century San Franciscan, and a lot of the attitudes of 1901 would make me uncomfortable. The past is a great place to visit, but I wouldn’t want to live there.

So, forget about the past. Time travel works in curious ways, and maybe on the next foggy morning I’d step through the veil and into the future. Not too far — maybe only six months, to a Sunday in October 2020.

What a strange time. The coronavirus had run its course, but tens of thousands of people had died all over the world.

The people had gotten over the sense of fear that had gripped the city in the spring, but everyone was still apprehensive. Nobody shook hands anymore, or hugged friends they hadn’t seen in a while. Social life wasn’t very social.

But the big change was in the life of the city. It was quieter. Gavin Newsom’s vision of waiters wearing masks serving dinner in half-empty places hadn’t come true. They had figured a way around that one. San Francisco used to be a great dining town, but by the fall, there were half as many restaurants as there had been a year ago.

Now Playing:

A lot of life had gone out of the city, too. There was no Fleet Week in October, no Hardly Strictly Bluegrass. People weren’t talking about baseball or football. The Warriors? Wait until next year.

A lot of people were broke. The coronavirus pandemic produced a worldwide economic crisis, and the big boom was history. Tough times hit a town where every homeowner was a paper millionaire only a year ago.

In the spring, the news was all about the virus. Now it was all about what to do next.

Late in the spring, the city voted to rent 8,000 hotel rooms to house the homeless. By fall, the debate was whether to turn them out in the street again. There were no tourists all summer, nobody to pay $8 to ride a cable car. So why spend city money on expensive cable cars?

Worst of all, everything had gone virtual: the Opera, the Symphony, movies, concerts, birthday parties, downtown shopping.

I looked around. I didn’t like the future much, so I waited for a gray day and slipped back into the present. It’s not so bad. I plan to put on a mask and slip out for a Sunday walk. It’s OK as long as I don’t go too far or encounter anyone. And, tomorrow is another day.

Carl Nolte is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: cnolte@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @CarlnolteSF