Advertisement

The Duke and Duchess of Sussex have paid an emotional tribute to the victims of the Christchurch terror attack today as they signed a book of condolence on behalf of the Royal Family, writing: 'We are with you.'

Prince Harry and a heavily-pregnant Meghan visited New Zealand House in London this afternoon to pay their respects to the 50 people massacred as they prayed at two mosques on Friday.

They put their knowledge of Maori customs to good use, flawlessly greeting delegates with a traditional Hongi nose rub before signing the book of condolence with the word 'aroha nui', which loosely translates to 'with deep affection'.

Meghan, who cradled her bump throughout the visit, wore a pair of earrings featuring a crossed-feathers design given to her by the country's prime minister Jacinda Ardern.

The couple were asked by the Queen to represent the British royal family at the event, having been the last members to visit the country when they went on their first overseas tour to the South Pacific in October last year.

Both dressed solemnly in black, the pair spoke with the High Commissioner of New Zealand, Jerry Mateparae, before laying floral bouquets and quietly reading other tributes left behind by members of the public.

Meghan watches on with her hand placed on her tummy as her husband Harry signs a book of condolence at New Zealand House in London

The Duke and Duchess of Sussex signed a book of condolence on behalf of the Royal Family, writing 'We are with you' and 'aroha nui', which is a Maori word loosely translated to 'with deep affection'

On a single page, Meghan and her husband left the message: 'Our deepest condolences... We are with you.' Beneath their signatures was the Maori word 'Arohanui', meaning 'with much affection'

Meghan's appearance today came more than a week after her last official public engagement before the arrival of her baby last Monday

Meghan and her husband were among the first people to sign the book of condolence, which has been left out for members of the public to leave their wellwishes to victims

The Duchess of Sussex received a Hongi from the High Commissioner of New Zealand Jerry Mateparae as she and her husband (shown right) arrived at New Zealand House in London today

Meghan places a reassuring hand on the back of her husband as they leave flowers outside the entrance to New Zealand House (shown right, the duchess holds on to her bump)

The duchess watches on as he husband, the Duke of Sussex, carefully places down a bouquet of flowers outside New Zealand House this afternoon

The duchess was seen carefully inspecting floral tributes left at a makeshift memorial outside New Zealand House in central London today

The Duke and Duchess examine the tributes left at New Zealand House for the victims of the massacre in Christchurch

The duke and duchess met with members of staff at the High Commission to discuss their response to the atrocity.

Meghan said 'we are with you', adding she was 'just devastated' by the atrocity, as she cradled her baby bump.

Harry said 'it's just very sad' as he asked about their connections to Christchurch.

Sir Jerry said: 'We are overwhelmed by the tremendous amount of support we've received from across the UK.

'Their Royal Highness's visit is reflective of this outpouring of support and it was wonderful to welcome them to New Zealand House.'

The duke and duchess are among the first to sign the book of condolence, which opened to the public on Tuesday.

They will also meet members of staff at the High Commission to discuss their response to the atrocity.

Brenton Tarrant, 28, from Australia, slaughtered worshippers as they prayed inside mosques in Christchurch on Friday, having outlined his anti-immigrant motives in a manifesto posted online minutes before his attack.

On Saturday, Tarrant appeared in court in Christchurch charged with one count of murder and was remanded until April 5. Police said further charges were expected to follow.

Meghan holds on to her belly as she wait to sign a book of condolence for victims of the New Zealand terror attack

The couple were greeted with a Hongi by High Commissioner Sir Jerry Mateparae and Deputy High Commissioner David Evans, having been asked represent the royal family because they are the most recent royal visitors to New Zealand

Both dressed solemnly in black, they were greeted with a traditional Hongi nose rub by the High Commissioner of New Zealand Jerry Mateparae, before laying flowers at a memorial

Meghan, seen clutching a bouquet, and her husband Harry (right, sharing a traditional 'Maori kiss') have paid an emotional tribute to the victims of the Christchurch terror attack today as they signed a book of condolence on behalf of the Royal Family

Meghan is greeted with a traditional Hongi nose rub by the High Commissioner of New Zealand Jerry Mateparae as she and Harry arrive at New Zealand House

The couple were invited to personally represent the royal family as they were the previous members to do so, having toured the country last year

Meghan was dressed in a long black coat and a matching skirt, along with a clutch bag and plain high heeled shoes, as she arrived in central London today

In the aftermath of the attack, the Duke and Duchess released a joint statement with the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, condemning the massacre

The Duke and Duchess of Sussex hold hands as they make their way inside New Zealand House, where Harry has visited several times through his work with the Invictus Games

New Zealand's prime minister Jacinda Ardern said the suspect held a gun licence which enabled him to legally obtain semi-automatic weapons. She said the country's gun laws would change in the wake of the attack.

Of those killed in the massacre, 42 died at the Masjid Al Noor mosque in central Christchurch, seven were killed at the suburban Linwood Masjid Mosque, and one person died at Christchurch Hospital.

What is the hongi and why is the traditional Maori greeting so sacred to the people of New Zealand? The hongi is the traditional Maori greeting that sees two people welcome each other by rubbing or touching noses. It is a New Zealand tradition that comes from the Maori legend on how women were created. The hongi is an important part of New Zealand's culture and those who are offered the greeting should always accept, because of its significance. If a New Zealander should perform the hongi would you, it means that you are to be 'unified' with the person and that you are now more than a guest. Hongi roughly translates to 'sharing of the breath' and when you complete it as a guest, you are given a sense of responsibility for the island. To display this, you may be given some tasks to complete to show your loyalty and appreciation. In the past, you may have had to fight on the island's behalf but in modern times you must complete personal tasks such as no trace on the island and respecting its natural beauty.

In the video live-streamed by Tarrant, a man inside a mosque appears to say 'Welcome brother' as a gunman approaches.

A number of improvised explosive devices found on a vehicle after the shootings were defused by police.

Mr Bush, who had earlier called the attack a 'very well-planned event', said the suspect was not known to police either in New Zealand or Australia. British security sources said there were no apparent UK links to the attack.

Facebook said it had removed 1.5 million videos of the attack worldwide in the 24 hours after the shootings, 1.2 million of which were blocked at upload.

On Tuesday, it said no-one had reported the video while it was being streamed live, with the first report coming 29 minutes after the broadcast began and 12 minutes after it had ended.

Chris Sonderby, vice president and deputy general counsel at Facebook, said the video was viewed fewer than 200 times during the live broadcast.

He said the company was 'working around the clock' to stop the video being posted on its site.

Ms Ardern has said authorities hope to release all the bodies by Wednesday and police said authorities were working with pathologists and coroners to complete the task as soon as they can.

As the nation continues to come to terms with the scale of the tragedy, Ms Ardern vowed action would be taken to ensure such an atrocity could never happen again.

On Monday, New Zealand's Cabinet made 'in principle' decisions about gun law reform, with further details to be announced by next Monday.

An inquiry into the events leading up to the attacks will also take place.

'There is anger that this happened here,' she said. 'There are many questions that need to be answered. The assurance that I give you is that they will be.'

New Zealand Police Commissioner Mike Bush previously said police were confident one person was responsible for the shootings.

'That doesn't mean there weren't possibly people in support and that is to form an important part of our investigation,' he added.

The Duchess of Sussex meets with New Zealand's High Commissioner to the United Kingdom, Jerry Mateparae (shown right)

A solemn-looking Meghan (shown placing a hand on her bump) was dressed in all black as she arrived at New Zealand House in London to pay her respects to the victims of the terror attack

Meghan shakes hands with New Zealand's High Commissioner to the United Kingdom as her an Harry arrive at New Zealand House to pay their respects

The Duchess laid a bouquet of flowers among other tokens of support and respect to those who lost their lives in the Christchurch terror shooting

Meghan looks solemn as she makes her way inside the building to sign a book of condolence, set up in tribute to the 50 people killed in Friday's attack

The Duke of Sussex receives a hongi from the High Commissioner of New Zealand Jerry Mateparae

The Duke and Duchess put on brave faces as they attended New Zealand House to pay their respects for the Christchurch terror attack

Prince Harry and Meghan joined hoards of others to pay their respect to the victims of the New Zealand terror attack at New Zealand House today

Meghan looked sombre as her and Harry visited New Zealand House today to pay their respects to those who lost their lives

Meghan wrote a message of solidarity in a book of condolence. The message read: 'Our deepest condolences. We are with you'. Meghan finished the signed note with the Maori word 'aroha nui', that translates to 'with deep affection'

Prince Harry laid down a bouquet of flowers as part of a makeshift tribute outside of New Zealand House

Prince Harry signed the note that Meghan wrote in a book of condolences at New Zealand House

Meghan looked lovingly at Harry as the pair showed their support with those suffering a loss due to the mass shooting in Christchurch

Meghan and Harry arrive outside New Zealand House, next to a pile of bouquets that have been left as tributes to those who lost their lives in the New Zealand terror attack

Meghan protectively covered her bump while she visited New Zealand house with Harry so the couple could pay their respects to those who lost their lives and those who lost loved ones in the Christchurch mosque shootings

The Duke and Duchess of Sussex arrived at New Zealand House in London today to pay their respects following the two mass shootings at mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand

Meghan joined Harry at New Zealand House today so the pair could pay their respects to those who lost their lives in the mass shootings at mosques in New Zealand. Meghan's appearance today came more than a week after her last official public engagement before the arrival of her baby

New Zealand's Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern hugs and consoles a woman as she visited Kilbirnie Mosque to lay flowers on Sunday

Floral tributes to those who were gunned down at the two mosques are seen against a wall bordering the Botanical Garden in Christchurch

A man was seen with bloodstains on his trousers soon after the shooting. New Zealand's Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has vowed action will be taken to ensure such an atrocity can never happen again

Well-wishers cried as they left floral tributes for the victims from the shootings at the two mosques in Christchurch

People light candles next to flowers and tributes laid by the wall of the Botanic Gardens in Christchurch

The duchess is believed to be around six weeks away from the arrival of her first child, which she has said is due in late April or early May.

Meghan and Harry's baby will be seventh in line to the throne and the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh's eighth great-grandchild.

Kensington Palace announced the pregnancy on the eve of the couple's first royal tour, which ended in New Zealand.

The duchess made a big impression on the country's people and was singled out for praise by figures including Ms Ardern.

She said Meghan's pregnancy 'increased my respect for the role that she's playing at such an often tiring time', adding: 'I have real empathy and I think she's incredible.'

The duchess in turn praised the efforts of Kiwi women who fought for the right to vote 125 years ago, saying they were 'universally admired'.

In the wake of last week's terror attack, the Queen led heartfelt messages of condolence from senior royals to the people of New Zealand.

In a joint message, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and the Duke and Duchess of Sussex said: 'We have all been fortunate to spend time in Christchurch and have felt the warm, open-hearted and generous spirit that is core to its remarkable people.

'No person should ever have to fear attending a sacred place of worship.'

Harry and Meghan are pictured meeting New Zealand's prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, at Government House in Wellington on October 28 last year

The Duke and Duchess joined with New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern at Pillars, a charity that supports children who have a parent in prison by providing special mentoring schemes, during their visit to New Zealand last year

The Duchess of Sussex was given a traditional maori greeting of a hongi as she attended the unveiling of The Queen's Commonwealth Canopy in Redvale, Auckland with Prince Harry

Prince Harry greets David Gascoigne at a traditional welcoming ceremony at Government House in Wellington during the Duke and Duchess's tour of New Zealand in October last year

Meghan attends a powhiri - a traditional Maori welcoming ceremony while on her and Harry's trip to New Zealand last year

Harry and Meghan met with children in New Zealand as they all took part in a competition together during their visit last year

Back in October, the Duchess of Sussex attended a reception hosted by the New Zealand PM on her visit to the country. She teamed her elegant evening dress with a simple black clutch and nude slingback court shoes

The Prime Minister of New Zealand praised the Duchess for continuing to work while pregnant when she visited the country in October