Gov. Michelle Lujan Grisham. (Office of the Governor)

COMMENTARY: Michelle Lujan Grisham has an impressive résumé. As governor she’s been highly visible by pushing New Mexico into national debates on hot topics like vehicle fuel efficiency and free college tuition. She isn’t afraid to take strong stands on issues when doing so will anger conservatives and sometimes even the progressive wing of her own party. She’s a female person of color.

And she appears to have boundless energy.

For all those reasons, there’s a good chance she will end up on the successful Democratic presidential candidate’s short list for vice president.

I hesitated for awhile to write this column. New Mexico’s last governor got lots of buzz in political discussions about vice president. The two governors before her ran unsuccessfully for president. The falls of Bill Richardson and Susana Martinez were swift and painful to watch, and no positive mark for New Mexico.

And to be clear, this column is no endorsement of Lujan Grisham for vice president. I don’t endorse. While I like some things she’s done as governor, I have concerns about others, including the way she has treated some employees — especially her firing, via proxy, her first education secretary, Karen Trujillo.

But timing can mean everything in politics. Lujan Grisham’s star appears to be rising at the right time.

The white men seeking the presidency, in particular, would be wise to consider a Latina to round out the ticket. A large swath of the Democratic Party is justifiably fed up with white men holding all the top jobs. The ticket needs to motivate people of color and their allies to vote.

Others will obviously be on the list. Some are presidential candidates like Kamala Harris, Julián Castro, Pete Buttigieg and Cory Booker, assuming they don’t win the nomination. There are also former candidates like Beto O’Rourke. All will likely get a close look that includes considering the followings they built.

But the winning campaign will also be wise to consider less-known politicians who could bring fresh energy to the national stage that could shine through next November’s election.

Like Lujan Grisham.

She’s a loyal foot soldier for the Democratic Party. She appears regularly on national television to promote the party line and is well-versed on the issues. At 60, she brings the wisdom of her years and the energy that’s rare in a politician of any age.

Choosing the right running mate usually doesn’t help a presidential candidate much, but choosing the wrong partner can be disastrous. Lujan Grisham’s years in the U.S. House and the Roundhouse make her a fairly known candidate. She’s skilled at delivering a powerful anti-Trump message.

I don’t know if Lujan Grisham wants the job, but my assumption is she has a strong sense of duty to the Democratic Party’s vision and would have to consider the possibility if approached.

In the meantime, there’s little talk about Lujan Grisham joining the ticket thus far. Even Twitter mentions are few.

That could work in her favor. While candidates duke it out to win the party’s presidential nomination, she’s focused on making changes in New Mexico while building the state’s reputation — and her own.

There are many variables and a lot of months before this is sorted out, so anything is possible. But it’s likely discussions about Lujan Grisham will increase as the 2020 election approaches.