Three weeks ago, which is to say an eternity, the women in my mother’s Minneapolis book club decided to set up a network of volunteer drivers to collect spare masks, gowns, and gloves—the personal protective equipment we all know now as PPE—from construction companies, nail salons, and individuals and deliver them to local hospitals. Demand was so high that they soon started sewing cloth masks. Then a friend of mine mentioned that it was becoming easier to buy supplies in China, where most of the equipment is made. I had lived in Shanghai for eight years and had briefly worked for a middleman friend there. I knew some suppliers and distributors. Why not help area hospitals arrange a bulk order for PPE?

That night, as I scrolled through my WeChat Moments feed, I noticed a Chinese friend in Texas posting about an order of PPE that she had managed to have sent from China to friends in Austin. The shipment, of 300 respirators, arrived smoothly. Suddenly she had interest from a hospital system. She started looking into arranging a much larger shipment. I joined in the hunt. Within a few days, I had price quotes from multiple suppliers.

In normal times, hospitals buy their PPE from medical distributors like McKesson and Cardinal Health, which manage their varied needs. The distributors handle the logistics, sourcing hand sanitizer from one supplier and respirators from another. The system works well when hospitals have predictable needs. But now, with medical and other institutions that need masks competing feverishly against each other, they’ve had to go outside their usual supply chains into untested waters. With demand for PPE soaring, a gray market has cropped up that is inhabited by popup brokers, speculators, and even scammers. Some of these buyers and sellers connect on an unlikely platform: LinkedIn.

LinkedIn, which is owned by Microsoft, has escaped much of the criticism directed at other social media sites over the past several years. Unlike Facebook or Twitter, it has not become a swamp of disinformation or vitriol; since users typically go there to make business contacts or search for jobs, they tend to be civil and professional. LinkedIn is also one of the few Western social media sites that isn’t blocked in China, making it an accessible platform for Chinese suppliers and brokers seeking contacts overseas. In order to continue operating there, LinkedIn complies with Chinese government rules, which include censorship. (US and European officials have reportedly said that LinkedIn is also used by Chinese intelligence officers, who create fake profiles to recruit foreign targets; LinkedIn says it actively seeks out and takes action against fraudulent accounts.) The more I explored the site, the more sellers I saw hawking wares. Some posts turned into virtual auctions, with brokers striving to outdo each other. Others degenerated into vicious attacks, with users accusing each other of price-gouging or fraud.

SIGN UP TODAY Sign up for the Backchannel newsletter and never miss the best of WIRED.

In this new chaotic world, brokers who have been in the market since January are considered veterans. Some have connections to China. Others come from the worlds of cryptocurrency, fintech, and medical marijuana—other markets rife with risk. “Everybody and his dog now is trying to sell medical equipment, and that’s dangerous,” said Clive Greenwood, a consultant in Suzhou, China, who performs quality control in medical supply factories and who has publicly criticized people whom he believes are speculators on LinkedIn.

Not long after she started trying to source medical supplies, my friend in Texas told me that she was close to giving up. “I don’t even know who I can trust,” she wrote. I came to agree.

In March, as the death toll in New York City mounted, a resident of the city named Josh Weinstein changed his employer on LinkedIn to “NY Corona Supply,” and his profile description to “Need 3M N95 1860 or 8210 for Governments and Hospitals ASAP.” He was previously focused on a cannabis industry group he had founded called CannaGather. One contact was alarmed. “Please tell me you’re not taking advantage?” he commented on the job update. “People are selling toilet paper rolls for $10.”