The opening day for the sport salmon season, delayed by the coronavirus pandemic, has been tentatively set for May 1 for the Bay Area and Monterey Bay coasts.

The Pacific Fisheries Management Council set the date this week amid the “looming uncertainty that the COVID-19 pandemic poses to many anglers hoping to access the fishery.”

The season was originally set to open April 4 in Monterey Bay. With fear over the spread of the coronavirus, all sportfishing operations and boat ramps on the California coast were shut down this month. Social distancing guidelines would require that anglers not cluster on boats, an order still in place.

Social interaction would be discouraged, said Capt. Tom Mattusch of the boat Huli Cat, and a member of the San Mateo County Harbor Commission. “You go salmon fishing and get a big salmon, who’s going to net it?” Mattusch said. “You can’t be closer than six feet.” This could delay the opener further because salmon fishing is a two-person job, where one person catches the fish with a rod and reel, and then alongside the boat, another nets it.

The federal government and the PFMC sets the salmon season and the California Department of Fish and Wildlife then enforces it. This past week, the California Fish and Game Commission gave Chuck Bonham, director of Fish and Wildlife, the power to delay fishing seasons to help stop the spread of the coronavirus, and Bonham indicated the first move would be to delay the April 25 opening of trout season in the Eastern Sierra in Alpine, Mono and Inyo counties.

It’s likely Bonham wouldn’t act to open salmon fishing without approval from the governor’s office, according to a source close to the situation.

A big season is at hand. State and federal scientists forecast 473,200 adult salmon off the Bay Area coast. That is up from 380,000 last year, when many sport anglers had their best catches in 10 years and commercial catches jumped the forecast by 50 percent. This year’s forecast is more than double the number of salmon available two years ago, 224,000 salmon.

“We’re hoping we can go fishing in May and get the summer in,” said Scott Sutherland, who operates Berkeley Charter Boats. “Think how many fish are swimming out there, getting bigger.”

When the season opens, the PFMC set the sport limit at 2 fish with a 20-inch size limit north of Pigeon Point, that is, for boats out of Bodega Bay, the Bay Area and Pillar Point Harbor in Half Moon Bay. For Monterey Bay, the size limit will be 24 inches.

The PFMC set the season to run through Nov. 8 on the Bay Area coast and through Oct. 4 in Monterey Bay.

On California’s northern coast, where the ocean is populated with salmon from the Klamath River, prospects are not as optimistic, according to the PFMC. The season is expected to open June 6 and run through Aug. 9. The Klamath River produced 186,600 adult salmon for the coming summer, compared to last year’s 274,000.

Tom Stienstra is The Chronicle’s outdoor writer. Email: tstienstra@sfchronicle.com. Twitter: @StienstraTom.