WEST JORDAN — Police are investigating a double homicide that occurred overnight.

On Saturday afternoon they confirmed that husband and wife Tony and Katherine Butterfield, 31 and 30, were found dead at a home near 3200 West and 6900 South. Police are looking for the killer, who they believe made a forced entry into the home.

Police responded to a call about possible gunshots about 1:15 a.m., said West Jordan Police Sgt. J.C. Holt.

"They found a man in the backyard who was deceased," Holt said. "It appeared that he had at least one gunshot wound."

Police found the female victim inside the home, Holt said. He said it appears a door had been kicked in at the home.

Victims of this mornings homicide are Tony and Katherine Butterfield, ages 31 and 30. Our deepest condolences to their loved ones and those close to them. Investigation continues. We are working hard to solve this terrible crime! pic.twitter.com/ruDtC0iNQy — West Jordan Police Dept. (@WJPD_PIO) April 18, 2020

"We do believe that there was some type of altercation between the suspect and one of those two homicide victims," Holt. he said the killer may have been injured with a knife during the altercation.

Three children, all under 5 years old, were home when the attack occurred but were not injured. "The children are safe," Holt said. "They're with relatives."

Police said they do not yet have a motive for the attack, and do not have a criminal history with the house or the victims.

"We do have some leads. We are asking the public if they know anybody that has a wound that there's not an explanation for, or behavior that seems inconsistent or could be related to this, we are asking you to reach out to us and let us know that information," Holt said.

The West Jordan main dispatch number is 801-840-4000.

@WJPD_PIO looking for the suspect in a double murder this morning. This is in the neighborhood of 6900 south, 3200 west. No motive, but police say they have leads in the case. pic.twitter.com/TtiyNgzkGG — Alex Cabrero (@KSL_AlexCabrero) April 18, 2020

Contributing: Alex Cabrero, KSL TV and Jen Riess KSL.com