Stock benchmarks on Thursday finished near the highs of the session, as investors appeared to focus on hope that a detente between some of the biggest oil producers on the planet might be achieved to substantially curb oil production and stabilize battered prices.

A tweet from President Donald Trump on the possibility of a big reduction helped to overshadow data that showed U.S. weekly jobless claims soared to a record.

However, Thursday’s action was marked by an opening swing lower as investors weighed bad news on the public health front and the economy.

What are major indexes doing?

The Dow Jones Industrial Average US:DJIA closed up 469.93 points, or 2.2%, at 21,413.44, near its intraday peak at 21,477.77, but the blue-chip benchmark touched a low for the day at 20,735.02. Meanwhile, the S&P 500 US:SPX ended 56.40 points, or 2.28%, higher at 2,526.90, while the Nasdaq Composite Index US:COMP gained 126.73 points, or 1.72%, to close at 7,487.31.

What’s driving the market?

Oil and oil-related stocks were the main focus of the action on Thursday, briefly superseding worries about the pandemic and woeful data that highlighted the economic pain exerted by measures to mitigate the spread of the deadly virus.

Stocks surged midmorning Thursday after Trump tweeted that he had been in contact with Saudi Arabian Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman and that he expected the Saudis and Russia to cut production by about 10 million barrels a day.

However, commodity experts raised doubts that such a reduction, which Trump at one point said could top 15 million barrels a day, was practical.

“It’s physically impossible for Saudi Arabia and Russia to get 10 million barrels a day off the market—they’d burst their onshore storage and fill every ship in sight,” Edward Marshall, a commodities trader at Global Risk, was quoted as saying by The Wall Street Journal.

The price war, which started in March, pushed crude oil to lose nearly two-thirds of its value in the first quarter, and has slammed the energy sector. The U.S. benchmark US:CL in March slumped to an 18-year low and dipped intraday below $20 a barrel. Shares of Exxon Mobil Corp. US:XOM and Chevron Corp. US:CVX were both up sharply after the announcement but remain roughly 40% lower for the year to date.

Trump’s tweet also comes a day before the president is scheduled to meet with U.S. oil-company executives on Friday at the White House to discuss possible aid for the industry amid the plummeting oil prices. Exxon Chief Executive Darren Woods, Chevron’s Chief Executive Mike Wirth, Occidental Petroleum’s US:OXY Chief Executive Vicki Hollub, and Continental Resources US:CLR Chief Executive Harold Hamm, are expected to be in attendance, according to The Wall Street Journal.

Moves for the market also come as investors confronted grim economic news. Some 6.65 million Americans filed for first-time jobless benefits, doubling the previous week’s record rise of 3.28 million the previous week. Previously, the record first-time claims number was below 700,000.

In a separate report, the government also said that the U.S. trade deficit narrowed to $39.9 billion in February from $45.5 billion in January.

Countless businesses across the country have been forced to close or scale back hours, throwing masses of people out of work and triggering an unprecedented back-to-back surge in initial jobless claims.

In just the past two weeks alone, new claims have easily exceeded the peak number of people who collected benefits during the 2007-09 recession. At the end of the last recession, 6.6 million people drew benefits, a record at that time.

“The economy is in bad shape and doubts are growing that the recent fiscal rescue package to help businesses might not be enough to keep people on their payroll,” said Edward Moya of brokerage Oanda. “It is unfortunate how bad these numbers are getting, and no one will be surprised if we see a few more terrible readings over the next few weeks. America needs the economy to reopen, but not at the cost of lives.”

What are other markets doing?

Oil soared, with the price of a barrel of West Texas Intermediate Crude US:CLK20 for May delivery rose $5.01, or 24.7%, to settle at $25.32 a barrel.

Government bond yields ticked down, but ended above earlier lows, with the benchmark U.S. 10-year Treasury note BX:TMUBMUSD10Y down by about 0.6 basis point to 0.624%.

Gold charted another gain, with the precious metal for June delivery US:GCM20 jumping up by $46.30, or 2.9%, to settle at $1,637.70 an ounce.

The dollar traded 0.3% higher compared with a basket of currency trading partners, as gauged by the ICE U.S. Dollar index US:DXY.

Which companies are in focus?

Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc. US:WBA on Thursday reported quarterly results that beat expectations but said it would hold off on issuing full-year guidance. Shares closed down 6.3% on Thursday.

Boeing US:BA is offering buyout and early retirement packages to employees as it works to combat the impact on its business of the coronavirus that causes COVID-19 that has grounded airlines around the world and decreased demand for new planes. Shares of the Dow component finished down 5.7%.

General Electric Co. US:GE shares closed 2% lower after investment bank UBS cut the conglomerate’s price target.

U.S. Bancorp US:USB shares rose 2,3% after a price-target cut from Deutsche Bank.

Shares of Shake Shack Inc. US:SHAK added 1.1% after the company said same-store sales fell by nearly a third in March compared with a year ago.

CarMax Inc. US:KMX shares fell 4.1% as the company said it had beat expectations in the quarter, before the coronavirus hit in March.

Related:American businesses are tapping their credit lines at the fastest pace ever