Hundreds of gallons of home-brewed hand sanitizer are bubbling out of the UC Berkeley biology labs, the same pungent, test-tube-filled rooms where students usually focus on good grades instead of good deeds.

With classes canceled and the teaching labs eerily empty, two Cal students decided to do what a handful of whiskey distillers and beer brewers have already done — use idled facilities to produce badly needed hand sanitizer.

Grad student Abrar Abidi gathered up ethanol, a fluid that never seems in short supply on a college campus, and mixed up 900 bottles for inmates and staff at the San Francisco County Jail, which was running low.

“We knew any day it could spread to the inmates,” Abidi said.

First he mixed the ethanol with rubbing alcohol, to render it undrinkable and prevent the stuff from being diverted to non-medicinal purposes.

Over the past four weeks, Abidi and UC Berkeley alum Yvonne Hao have produced 400 gallons of home brew, using a lab in the biomedical and health sciences building where, until last month, students were conducting biology and genetics experiments for science classes. The bottles are going to homeless shelters, senior centers and nursing homes around the Bay Area.

Instructor Robert Tijan said he gladly turned over his lab for the project and ordered extra ethanol and other raw materials from his teaching budget. He said he “couldn’t image a better use” for the lab and for students’ time — at least not until classes resume.

Idle campus labs are being repurposed for sanitizer-making at UCSF, too, where students are turning out 175 gallons a week. Doctoral student Elina Kostyanovskaya and classmates expect to deliver 15,000 bottles this month to local prisons, jails, shelters and housing projects.

Free playgroups for pets: Dogs and cats looking for a good time should call 888-WAG-LINE.

That’s the number to reserve a spot in a free play group at the high-end pet boarding establishment (don’t say “kennel”) known as the Wag Hotel.

Usually an ultra suite at the hotel runs $150 a day (including a free bedtime story), and a daytime playgroup session goes for $47. But during the pandemic, all five Wag Hotels in the Bay Area are offering free playgroups on Tuesdays.

The catch is that you have to be vaccinated — not against coronavirus, but against rabies and distemper.

The manager at the Wag Hotel in Redwood City said no fewer than 50 dogs had taken advantage of the free deal this week.

“We have 30 big dogs and 20 little dogs,” said the manager, who did not identify herself by name. “That’s not really a lot of dogs for us.”

During the day, pet owners can check in on their animals using the online pet camera. At the Redwood City facility, the pet cam showed dozens of dogs roaming the indoor and outdoor grounds, which include a wading pool and serve-yourself chew toys. The manager said the dogs were “sunbathing,” but most of them appeared on the pet cam to be more interested in sniffing each other’s rear ends.

The dogs, not being human, were not observing social distance, but Wag Hotel staff and customers were. All dogs are met curbside on arrival by masked and gloved staff members and delivered back to their owners in the same 6-feet-distancing manner.

The free playgroups run until the end of the month. In a statement, the facility said it was offering the deal as a “community service” because “many public parks and dog parks (have) closed” and pets are “in need of a fun and safe place to release their excess energy.”

Trains salute health care workers: Amtrak locomotives will blast their horns at noon on Thursday to salute workers fighting the pandemic.

The blaring horns will be the railroader’s equivalent of the howling, singing and pot-and-pan banging that the Bay Area is doing out its windows every evening. Amtrak is joining other railroads across the country in the salute. BART and AC Transit say they’re all aboard, too.

Amtrak has cut service nationwide to reflect falling demand during the pandemic. In California, service has been reduced on the Capitol Corridor, San Joaquin and Pacific Surfliner routes. In addition, the railroad is running trains at no greater than half capacity to allow passengers to spread out and maintain social distance. It is scrubbing the insides of trains more often and is accepting only cashless payment throughout the system.

Steve Rubenstein is a staff writer for The S.F. Chronicle. Email: srubenstein@sfchronicle.com

More Information Share with us the ‘good news’ The news these days can be sobering, even grim. There’s a lot of uncertainty and discomfort most everywhere you look. But amid the darkness, there are rays of light: young people helping older neighbors, musicians and fitness coaches offering their talents online, neighbors having outdoor dance parties (using proper social distancing). We’d like to know about examples of good news you have witnessed during this time. You can tell us your thoughts online at SFChronicle.com by using our Assignment Editor tool, or send an email (which can include a photo) with the subject line “Good News” to metro@sfchronicle.com.