President Donald Trump weighed in on restrictions that state governors have put in place for the coronavirus quarantine at Saturday's White House coronavirus task force briefing. Trump said Virginia is using the pandemic to enact gun control legislation and called now a good time to bring up Second Amendment rights.



"They are being unreasonable but I think Virginia is a great case though because they are using this, they are trying to take your guns away in Virginia and if people in Virginia aren't careful that's what's going to happen to them so yeah, I mean I could see where he's coming from," Trump said. "I think it's a strong statement, a strong statement because hopefully this will be over very soon for all of us but some have gotten carried away. They have absolutely gotten carried away."



"Is this the right time to kind of bring in a Second Amendment issue?" a Wall Street Journal reporter asked Trump.



"I think when they talk about taking your guns away and if you notice at the beginning of this pandemic there were more guns sold I think that at almost any time in history so it's obviously a big issue and then you have them working and signing documents trying to take your Second Amendment away essentially. So I do think it is an appropriate time to bring it up," Trump responded.





QUESTION: Thank you Mr. President. You have mentioned the importance of social distancing but for example Stephen Moore when you have pointed to your open the country task force is over organizing a protest in Wisconsin but aren't they in a sense protesting your very own guidelines?



TRUMP: Well, we have a flexibility. I didn't see what Stephen said. I can tell you he's a very good economist. He has been calling shots right--



QUESTION: He said--sorry. He said, "we need to be the Rosa Parks of government injustices."



TRUMP: Well, there is a lot of injustice. When you look at Virginia where they want to take your guns away, they want to violate your second amendment. When you look at I mean look, I am getting along very nicely with the governor of Michigan but she has things don't buy paint, don't buy roses don't my--I mean she's got all of these crazy things. I really believe somebody sitting in their boat in a lake should be okay. They shouldn't arrest people. Some of them are being unreasonable I really believe that. They are being unreasonable but I think Virginia is a great case though because they are using this, they are trying to take your guns away in Virginia and if people in Virginia aren't--aren't careful that's what's going to happen to them so yeah, I mean I could see where he's coming from. I think it's a strong statement, a strong statement because hopefully this will be over very soon for all of us but some have gotten carried away. They have absolutely gotten carried away.



QUESTION: -- these protesters are protesting your social distancing guidelines?



TRUMP: I mean I noticed there are a lot of protest out there and I just think that some of the governors have gotten carried away. You know we have a lot of people that don't have to be told to do what they are doing. They have really been doing everything we have ask them. We have a few states where frankly I spoke to the governors and I could have gotten them to do if I wanted to do would have been perhaps politically correct but they have been doing incredibly anyway and as one of them said everybody is doing exactly the same. In fact our record is better than states where they are under a mandate or you know where they have agreed to do certain things. We have some great states out there.



We have incredible people in our country and for the most part that it's a strong statement but I understand where he's coming from and I think one of the greats would be one of the really important places that people really have to start looking at is what is going on in Virginia because that's a mess with a governed--with really a governor that is under siege anyway. Yeah, please. With the beautiful head of white hair go ahead. I will tell you if I like his hair and about a minute after he asked the question.



WALL STREET JOURNAL REPORTER: On that point though because the tweeting about in the case of Virginia linking second amendment to some of these issues about lifting some of these restrictions in these states and not... a concern for the governors and civil unrest (INAUDIBLE)?



TRUMP: I think just for that question I think that's an easy one. That's not even politics. We are entitled to a second amendment and he's trying to take the second amendment, meaning that state is trying to take the Democrats in the state, the Republicans are fighting it. They are trying to take that--that second amendment, right, but second amendment right away. To me that's liberty, that's when I say liberate Virginia I would say liberate Virginia when that kind of thing happens and where does it all stop? So I think it's a very good analogy. Go ahead.



QUESTION: Is this the right time to kind of bring in a second amendment issue?



TRUMP: I think when they talk about taking your guns away and if you notice at the beginning of this pandemic there were more guns sold I think that at almost any time in history so it's obviously a big issue and then you have them working and signing documents trying to take your--your Second Amendment away essentially. So I do think it is an appropriate time to bring it up. Go ahead. Go ahead, second.

