A bipartisan group of lawmakers from New Jersey and New York is calling for the creation of a fund to provide at least $40 billion to help their states mitigate the impact of the coronavirus pandemic.

In a letter — led by Reps. Josh Gottheimer Joshua (Josh) GottheimerPelosi backs remote voting for House The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (D-N.J.), Chris Smith Christopher (Chris) Henry SmithNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Stranded Americans accuse airlines of price gouging Lawmakers propose waiving travel fees for coronavirus evacuations abroad MORE (R-N.J.), Tom Suozzi (D-N.Y.), Pete King Peter (Pete) KingNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus John Kerry: GOP lawmaker against coronavirus package 'tested positive for being an ---hole' Lawmakers highlight flights back to DC for huge coronavirus vote MORE (R-N.Y.), Hakeem Jeffries Hakeem Sekou JeffriesDemocrats call on Trump to halt border wall construction amid pandemic NY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Democrats struggle to keep up with Trump messaging on coronavirus MORE (D-N.Y.) and Tom Reed Thomas (Tom) W. ReedNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Hillicon Valley: Google bans Zoom from its work computers | Dem cautions White House against using surveillance to fight virus | Lawmakers push House leaders on remote voting Lawmakers outline proposals for virtual voting MORE (R-N.Y.) — sent to Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiLady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Trump criticizes Pelosi over stalemate on small business loan funds MORE (D-Calif.) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse GOP Rep. French Hill named to coronavirus oversight committee MORE (R-Ky.), the lawmakers said their states are at “the epicenter of the outbreak” and have a more pressing need for additional resources to navigate response efforts than other areas of the country.

“We request that a separate fund of at least $40 billion be created in the interim emergency COVID-19 relief package and it be allocated among the States based upon their share of the national infection rate according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention tracking data on April 10, 2020,” they wrote.

ADVERTISEMENT

“This $40 billion fund would be independent of other proposed state and local stabilization funds using traditional population-based formulas. This proposed formula for disbursing the $40 billion fund will provide assistance to the most impacted states,” they added.

The group noted that just under half of the cases seen in the United States have taken place in the two states, yet they have only received 9 percent in federal aid to hospitals despite the disproportionate burden they’ve faced.

“We need to provide resources to our states proportionate to the burden they bear. Currently, New York and New Jersey have a combined number of 208,100 cases of COVID 19, or 45 percent of all COVID-19 cases in the country,” the letter reads.

“As of April 10th, our states have more confirmed cases than the next 18 highest states combined. New York and New Jersey are not alone in the suffering and costs of responding to the pandemic, but federal aid has not been allocated proportionately to the impact of the virus,” the lawmakers wrote.

The lawmakers cautioned that without changing the formula on how aid is distributed in the next relief package, it could have grave consequences in the states’ economies and health care systems.

ADVERTISEMENT

“The current and historical funding formulas used by the federal government are insufficient in the face of this global epidemic. New York and New Jersey need substantial emergency funding in order to fill budgetary holes for critical services during this crisis,” they wrote.

“Without adequate, and proportional assistance, we fear that our states will be forced to cut services, such as health care, education, nutrition, first responders, free and fair elections, and transportation. In addition, this pandemic has negatively impacted the finances of our counties, cities, towns and villages,” they added.

The lawmakers stressed that local governments are facing hardships due to the financial fallout caused by the pandemic, adding that they believe it’s critical that the next bill includes language to help them stay afloat.

“Economically, the business shut down has resulted in reduced sales tax revenues, permit fees, and other local levies. It is also likely that many unemployed landowners will be unable to pay their property taxes, adding even more stress to local budgets,” they wrote.

“Our local governments have also felt the added financial strain of responding directly to COVID-19 as they struggle to meet the needs of the hospitals, police, EMTs and other emergency services. This has resulted in increased expenses for our local governments and we therefore support a separate stabilization fund to address their fiscal needs,” they added.

As top lawmakers look to pass a fourth coronavirus relief measure in coming weeks, Gottheimer noted the strain hospitals in his district have seen since the start of the outbreak

“New Jersey has continued to see a very high caseload, we've got 68,000 cases statewide — in my district which has been hit the hardest we've got 16,000 cases and lost more than 600 people. So as you know some states like Montana. I'm not sure what the numbers are, but thankfully, have not been hit nearly as hard as the whole state and my district's been hit,” he told The Hill in an interview Wednesday.

“So, you start to look at these numbers and you say, just like we would with the natural disaster when a hurricane hits, or a tornado hits, and we focus on where it landed. And unfortunately for us, the eye of the storm has been on our states in the region. And then we should make sure that the resources are allocated going forward,” he added.

The New Jersey Democrat said while the curve is beginning to flatten, it’s critical that Congress act quickly to pass legislation that includes provisions aimed at helping combat all aspects of the crisis.

“You can't have your head in the sand about reality here, and reality is we're getting crushed in New Jersey in New York. We've got so many cases and lost so many lives, and yes, the curve is flattening because of the measures we've taken but you still just yesterday had thousands more who are sick, and lost thousands of more people yesterday,” he said.

“We must help our small businesses right we must have a plan to get back to work that we're developing, which we need as well, right, which is a central position economic crisis, not just a health crisis, but to pass anything right now that does not take into account the multiple fronts that are what that we're dealing with, it's just incredulous to me,” he added.

Reps. Kathleen Rice Kathleen Maura RiceNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Here are the lawmakers who have self-quarantined as a precaution Top Democrats demand answers on DHS plans to deploy elite agents to sanctuary cities MORE (D-N.Y.), Lee Zeldin Lee ZeldinTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening NY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Dybul interview; Boris Johnson update MORE (R-N.Y.), Gregory Meeks Gregory Weldon MeeksNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Biden rolls out over a dozen congressional endorsements after latest primary wins Democrats balk at Trump's payroll tax cut proposal MORE (D-N.Y.), Grace Meng Grace MengNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Empowering youth peacebuilders will make U.S. foreign policy more effective 12 things to know today about coronavirus MORE (D-N.Y.), Nydia Velázquez (D-N.Y.), Yvette Clarke Yvette Diane ClarkeNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Overnight Health Care — Presented by American Health Care Association — Dems 'frustrated' by coronavirus response after briefing | Mulvaney claims press covering outbreak to take Trump down | Pence bolsters task force House approves bill banning flavored tobacco products MORE (D-N.Y.), Jerrold Nadler Jerrold (Jerry) Lewis NadlerNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus House Judiciary Committee postpones hearing with Barr amid coronavirus outbreak House Democrats plead with key committee chairman to allow remote voting amid coronavirus pandemic MORE (D-N.Y.), Carolyn Maloney Carolyn Bosher MaloneyHillicon Valley: House Dems push for B in state election funds | Amazon suspends over 6,000 sellers for price gouging | Google says 18M malicious coronavirus emails sent daily House Democrats push hard for mail-in voting funds NY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus MORE (D-N.Y.), Adriano Espaillat Adriano de Jesus Espaillat CabralNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Obama presses for social distancing policies to remain in place Self-quarantined New York lawmaker: 'We should be in total lockdown' MORE (D-N.Y.), Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez Alexandria Ocasio-CortezIran's 'Khashoggi': Where's the outrage over the death of Masoud Molavi Vardanjani? The Hill's Campaign Report: Warren throws her support behind Biden NY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus MORE (D-N.Y.), José Serrano (D-N.Y.), Sean Patrick Maloney (D-N.Y.), Antonio DelgadoAntonio Ramon DelgadoDemocrats press USDA to create rural coronavirus task force NY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Hispanic Caucus campaign arm unveils non-Hispanic endorsements MORE (D-N.Y.), Paul Tonko Paul David TonkoNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Bottom Line Trump administration expected to roll back Obama-era mileage standards MORE (D-N.Y.), Elise Stefanik Elise Marie StefanikPelosi backs remote voting for House NY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Bottom line MORE (R-N.Y.), Anthony Brindisi (D-N.Y.), John Katko John Michael KatkoNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Democrats struggle to keep up with Trump messaging on coronavirus To fight the rising tide of hate in our country, we must stop bias-based bullying in the classroom MORE (R-N.Y.), Joe Morelle Joseph (Joe) MorelleNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Overnight Health Care: House panel advances legislation on surprise medical bills | Planned Parenthood, ACLU sue over Trump abortion coverage rule | CDC identifies 13th US patient with coronavirus House panel advances bipartisan surprise billing legislation despite divisions MORE (D-N.Y.), Brian Higgins Brian HigginsNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus On The Money: Deficit spikes 25 percent through January | Mnuchin declines to say why Trump pulled Treasury nominee who oversaw Roger Stone case | Lawmakers trade insults over Trump budget cuts Lawmakers trade insults over Trump budget cuts MORE (D-N.Y.), Donald Norcross Donald W. NorcrossNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Lawmakers, labor leaders ramp up calls to use Defense Production Act Biden rolls out over a dozen congressional endorsements after latest primary wins MORE (D-N.J.), Jefferson Van Drew (R-N.J.), Andy Kim (D-N.J.), Frank Pallone Jr. (D-N.J.), Tom Malinowski Thomas (Tom) MalinowskiNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Georges Benjamin says cutting WHO funds could be crime against humanity; COVID-19 cases surpass 2 million George Conway: Trump can't accept that the presidency doesn't belong to him MORE (D-N.J.), Albio Sires Albio B. SiresNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Lawmakers raise concerns over Russia's growing influence in Venezuela Lawmakers request watchdog probe of Trump admin's ending of temporary protected status MORE (D-N.J.), Bill Pascrell William (Bill) James PascrellNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Analysis: Some states getting 0K per coronavirus case, New York getting K One year in, Democrats frustrated by fight for Trump tax returns MORE (D-N.J.), Donald Payne Jr. (D-N.J.), Mikie Sherrill Rebecca (Mikie) Michelle SherrillThe Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day NY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus MORE (D-N.J.), and Bonnie Watson Coleman Bonnie Watson ColemanNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Allegations of bed bugs at Trump's Doral resort swarm Twitter A dozen House Democrats call on EU ambassador to resign amid Ukraine scandal MORE (D-N.J.) also signed on to the letter.