Photo illustration by Slate. Photos by Getty Images Plus.

Every week, Dear Prudence answers additional questions from readers, just for Slate Plus members.

Q. Interrogated by girlfriend: I’ve run into a challenging pattern with my girlfriend of three years. She’s a trained social worker, so she’s used to asking questions to help people get to the bottom of their frustrations (e.g., “What makes you think that?” or “How do you know that to be true?”). The problem is, when she uses these techniques on me during conflict, it drives me crazy. It makes me feel like a) I can’t trust my own feelings, and b) all the onus is on me to figure out why I was upset and change my attitude. I spend the entire conflict justifying and defending why I feel the way I do rather than having her acknowledge any wrongdoing. Even if I say something obvious like “When you ignored my texts for hours after our fight, I felt scared that you were really upset with me,” she’ll respond back with “Why would I be upset with you? What else did I do to make you think that?” It’s crazy-making! Am I overreacting to a completely healthy style of conflict resolution? Is it reasonable to ask my girlfriend to not utilize her social work techniques in her personal life?

The rest of this article is only for Slate Plus members. When you join, you’ll get: • Our Slate Academy series on subjects like slavery in America, fascism, and great books • Extended, ad-free versions of Slate podcasts • More answers from Dear Prudence • Discounts on Slate Live events And that’s only the beginning. Membership is just $35 for your first year and helps support Slate’s hard-hitting independent journalism. Join today! Join Now Already a member? Sign in here.

A: Oh, this would drive me absolutely up the wall. I have no idea if it’s actually standard social worker training to say “Why would I be upset with you?” every time someone says “I worry you’re upset with me,” and I don’t think it really matters. If you tell her how you’re feeling and her response is to say “What did I do to make you feel that way?” over and over again, I can’t imagine how productive, open conversations could be possible between the two of you. Nor can I imagine a “completely healthy style of conflict resolution” that results in one person being constantly on the defensive and the other person never apologizing or acknowledging they could have possibly done something wrong. It’s absolutely reasonable to ask her to stop, but my guess is that her response to that will be “Now why would you ask me to stop asking questions? What is it about questions that threatens you so much?” At which point my response would be to break up with her and never look back.