Bay Area residents have started cutting up their old T-shirts and fishing old camping bandanas out of the garage to make ready for the coming of the mandatory mask rule.

“I’ve got plenty of old T-shirts,” said Nick Cifuentes, who was standing in line in a Glen Park coffee bar on Saturday morning without wearing a mask, something that had become technically illegal several hours before.

“I think it’s a good idea. Maybe it’s overkill but it’s better to be safe and to respect what’s happening,” he added.

He studied the pattern printed in The Chronicle of how to turn the bottom third of a T-shirt into a mask with only a pair of scissors.

“No sewing!” said the man behind him in line, who glanced at the pattern, too. “Hey, I can do that.”

The mask requirement took effect late Friday night in San Francisco, Marin, Alameda, San Mateo and Contra Costa counties, although enforcement will not begin until Wednesday morning. At that time, any adult in stores, on transit or waiting in line on the sidewalk will need to be wearing some sort of facial covering. Walkers, cyclists, joggers and other exercisers are exempt.

Bare-faced scofflaws could be fined or imprisoned, said San Francisco Mayor London Breed, although authorities are calling for voluntary compliance and do not envision jail cells full of unmasked outlaws.

Joseph Soto of Oakland had just ridden BART from the East Bay without benefit of mask and was standing outside the Glen Park station without one, too.

Soto said homemade masks provide “a false peace of mind” and little protection from the coronavirus, but he said he would wear one if that’s the rule.

“I understand the concept but I think a cough or sneeze can get through one of these things,” he said. “Personally I think the authorities are overdoing it.”

Gabriel Lemus just emerged from the BART station wearing a mask, which he had worn on his ride from Richmond to his horticulture job in San Francisco. Half of his fellow passengers, he said, had been bare-faced.

“I’m not taking any chances,” he said. “Masks for everyone is a great idea. If this is going to be the new normal, I’m all right with that. It’s not that big a thing.”

Seeing so many people without masks, Lemus said, made him “angry and frustrated.”

“People don’t like being told what to do, I understand that,” he said “But this virus is the real thing. Not to take precautions is just being ignorant.”

At nearby Canyon Market, 20 shoppers — most of them wearing masks — waited their turn to enter the store. Each stood on orange marks painted 6 feet apart on the sidewalk. The line was so long that it stretched past the market’s own sidewalk marks and spilled into another series of black 6-foot sidewalk marks in front of the Bello coffee bar.

Shoppers Drake Poston and Becky Foster took their masks off to sip coffee, because drinking hot coffee through a mask has medical implications, too.

“Coffee first,” said Poston. “Then the mask goes back on. In the grand scheme of things, having to wear a mask should not be someone’s greatest concern. “

Another market shopper, Declan Starr, probably said, through his mask, that it was “better to err on the side of caution” although it was hard to tell for sure.

The hottest feature in the newspaper seemed to be the colorful half-page on how to make homemade face masks without sewing, and several people in line were looking at it. One kind of mask is made by making strategic cuts on the bottom 8 inches of a T-shirt. Another can be constructed by adding half a paper coffee filter and two rubber bands to a folded bandana.

The county-by-county face mask rules could soon be replaced by one encompassing all of California. Gov. Gavin Newsom said he is “leaning in that direction.” Face masks have been required in public in Los Angeles since April 10.

Newsom said he and his family wear face masks when shopping for groceries. He does not wear a face mask when conducting press briefings about face masks.

Official guidance on homemade face masks and their benefits has been inconsistent.

Medical-grade N95 face masks should reserved for health care workers. Ordinary face coverings are said to work less well at blocking incoming and outgoing pathogens. Earlier this month, the California Department of Public Health said only that “there may be a benefit to reducing asymptomatic transmission and reinforcing physical distancing” from the use of homemade masks, and that wearing masks does not replace the need for keeping at least 6 feet away from others.

Steve Rubenstein is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: srubenstein@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @SteveRubeSF