On Monday night, President Donald Trump took to Twitter to voice his outrage after Senate Democrats effectively went on record as pro-infanticide. All but three Democrats in the Senate voted against Nebraska Sen. Ben Sasse’s Born-Alive Abortion Survivors Protection Act, which would mandate doctors to provide medical care to babies born-alive after botched abortions.

“Senate Democrats just voted against legislation to prevent the killing of newborn infant children. The Democrat position on abortion is now so extreme that they don’t mind executing babies AFTER birth,” President Trump tweeted. “This will be remembered as one of the most shocking votes in the history of Congress. If there is one thing we should all agree on, it’s protecting the lives of innocent babies.”

….This will be remembered as one of the most shocking votes in the history of Congress. If there is one thing we should all agree on, it’s protecting the lives of innocent babies. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 26, 2019

Planned Parenthood President Leana Wen was apparently “disgusted” by President Trump’s tweet, not that born-alive babies might be left to die, which according to Wen, doesn’t happen. (It does.) And to muck up matters further, Wen curiously invoked her status as a mother of a one-year-old to underscore her outrage at Trump.

For real.

“As a mother to a one-year old, I am disgusted by [Donald Trump’s] lies that aim to stoke fear and division. I know his true intention: to shame women, limit our access to health care, and take away our rights,” she wrote.

As a mother to a one-year old, I am disgusted by @RealDonaldTrump’s lies that aim to stoke fear and division. I know his true intention: to shame women, limit our access to health care, and take away our rights. https://t.co/8JSgPKQmdk — Leana Wen, M.D. (@DrLeanaWen) February 26, 2019

“The President of the United States is lying to the American people about the Sasse bill. What [Donald Trump] is saying has no basis in medicine—or reality,” Wen claimed in a follow-up tweet.

The President of the United States is lying to the American people about the Sasse bill. What @RealDonaldTrump is saying has no basis in medicine—or reality. — Leana Wen, M.D. (@DrLeanaWen) February 26, 2019

As reported by The Daily Wire on Tuesday, this talking point is just not true. There are botched abortions where babies survive, according to the Center for Disease Control. Moreover, undercover video footage has captured abortion workers talking about such instances. Live Action’s Lila Rose highlighted this travesty in a statement issued Monday night:

“Live Action has documented on camera how abortionists in our country’s notorious late-term abortion facilities talk about survivors of abortion. Washington, D.C. abortionist Cesare Santangelo told our undercover investigators that he would make sure babies ‘do not survive’ if they were born alive at his facility,” said Rose. “A New York abortion worker told our Live Action investigator to ‘flush’ the baby down the toilet or ‘put it in a bag’ if she’s born alive. In Arizona, an abortion worker told us there ‘may be movement’ after the baby is outside of the mother and that they would refuse to provide help and instead let her die. Dr. DeShawn Taylor, former medical director for Planned Parenthood, told a Center for Medical Progress investigator that identifying ‘signs of life’ after a baby survives an abortion is contingent upon ‘who’s in the room.’”

The Born-Alive Abortion Survivors Protection Act amends the criminal code to “prohibit a health care practitioner from failing to exercise the proper degree of care in the case of a child who survives an abortion or attempted abortion.”

“If an abortion results in the live birth of an infant, the infant is a legal person for all purposes under the laws of the United States, and entitled to all the protections of such laws,” the legislation states, adding: “Any infant born alive after an abortion or within a hospital, clinic, or other facility has the same claim to the protection of the law that would arise for any newborn, or for any person who comes to a hospital, clinic, or other facility for screening and treatment or otherwise becomes a patient within its care.”