Spain Health workers react during a tribute for their co-worker Esteban, a male nurse who died of COVID-19, outside the Severo Ochoa Hospital, in Leganes, Spain, April 13, 2020. Susana Vera/Reuters

Boxes of food are distributed to people in their cars by the Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank, in downtown Pittsburgh, April 10, 2020. The food bank set up a drive thru distribution near PPG Arena. Gene J. Puskar/AP

Ecuador Guayaquil's auxiliary bishop Giovanni Battista Piccioli wears a face mask as he gives the blessing while overflying the city during Holy Week, on April 9, 2020, in Ecuador. Enrique Ortiz/AFP via Getty Images

Britain People take part in a fitness class 'On the Step' led by Simon Garner in Kennington, during the coronavirus pandemic, in London, April 4, 2020. Hannah Mckay/Reuters

India Hospital staff carry candles and oil lamps to show solidarity with people affected by the COVID-19. and with doctors, nurses and other healthcare workers all over the world during a 21-day nationwide lockdown to slow the spread of the disease, in Kolkata, India, April 5, 2020. Rupak De Chowdhuri/Reuters

New York Katherine Ramos holds hand with her 4-year-old daughter, Victoria Ramos, at their home in Patterson, New York. Ramos is one of an army of health care workers who heeded New York's call for help reinforcing hospitals overwhelmed by the coronavirus pandemic. Ramos, of Cape Coral, Florida, is staying with her family in Patterson while she works as a nurse at New York Presbyterian Hospital. James Ramos via AP

France A medical professional on the platform of the Gare d'Austerlitz train station watches a COVID-19 patient through the window of a TGV high-speed train prior to its departure from Paris, April 1, 2020. COVID-19 patients were evacuated from Paris' regional hospitals to other hospitals in the western Brittany region, where the coronavirus has had limited impact so far. AFP via Getty Images

New York Nurses at Montefiore Medical Center Moses Division hold an "urgent community speak out" and press conference in front of the hospital demanding N95 masks and other critical PPE to handle the COVID-19 outbreak, April 2, 2020, in New York. New York is suffering from a critical shortage of medical supplies needed to handle the pandemic. Bebeto Matthews/AP

Michigan A woman reacts to members of City Impact, a faith-based organization from Cedar Springs, singing and praying for residents and staff at Metron of Cedar Springs nursing home in Cedar Springs, Michigan, April 1, 2020. Administrators at Metron announced the nursing home has multiple residents and staff who have tested positive for the coronavirus. Cory Morse | Mlive.com/ (Cory Morse/The Grand Rapids Press via AP

Brazil An aerial view of Vila Formosa cemetery during a burial amidst the coronavirus pandemic, in Sao Paulo, Brazil, on April 1, 2020. According to Johns Hopkins University, Brazil had 299 recorded deaths from the virus as of April 2, 2020. Miguel Schincariol/Getty Images

New York Dr. Joshua Rosenberg, center, the Medical Director, Surgical ICU & Attending Internist of Brooklyn Hospital Center, tends to a patient suffering from COVID-19 in the Surgical Intensive Care Unit of the hospital, March 30, 2020, in New York City.<BR><BR> The coronavirus crisis has pummeled the Brooklyn hospital along with others throughout New York City. Victor J. Blue/The New York Time/Redux Pictures

New York The USNS Comfort passes the Statue of Liberty as it enters New York Harbor to help New York City with the coronavirus outbreak, March 30, 2020. The ship has 750 hospital beds. Mike Segar/Reuters

India Crowds of Indian migrant workers wait to board buses to return to their native villages as a nationwide lockdown is implemented to combat the spread of COVID-19, on March 28, 2020, on the outskirts of New Delhi, India.<BR><BR>The lockdown has left tens of thousands of out-of-work migrant workers stranded, with rail and bus services shut down. Getty Images

An aerial view of Huntington Beach and its shuttered pier amid the coronavirus pandemic, on March 28, 2020, in Huntington Beach, Calif. The city of Huntington Beach closed its pier and parking lots along the beach in efforts to limit the spread of COVID-19, although the beach itself remains open. Mario Tama/Getty Images

Dana Baer and her son Jacob Baer wish Avery Slutsky a happy sixth birthday from their car during a drive-by birthday celebration as they maintain social distance amid the coronavirus outbreak across the country, in West Bloomfield Township, Mich., March 24, 2020. Emily Elconin/Reuters

Switzerland The Matterhorn mountain is illuminated by Swiss light artist Gerry Hofstetter to send messages of hope, support and solidarity to the people suffering from the global coronavirus pandemic, in Zermatt, Switzerland, March 26, 2020. Valentin Flauraud/Keystone via AP

New York People wait in line for a COVID-19 test at Elmhurst Hospital Center, March 25, 2020, in New York City. <BR><BR>Gov. Andrew Cuomo sounded his most dire warning yet about the coronavirus pandemic stating the infection rate in New York is accelerating and the state could be as close as two weeks away from a crisis that sees 40,000 people in intensive care. Such a surge would overwhelm hospitals, which now have just 3,000 intensive care unit beds statewide. John Minchillo/AP

Thailand Food delivery staff sits on chairs spaced out for social distancing, due to the coronavirus outbreak, as they wait for their customers' orders at a department store in Bangkok, March 24, 2020. Chalinee Thirasupa/Reuters

Italy Coffins of people who died from COVID-19 are seen in the church of the Serravalle Scrivia cemetery, in Alessandria, Italy, which, like many places in northern Italy, is struggling to cope with numerous deaths from the virus, on March 23, 2020. In Italy, the death toll from COVID-19 has now surpassed that of China for the most in the world. Flavio Lo Scalzo/Reuters

Italy Don Giuseppe Corbari, parson of the Church of Robbiano, holds Sunday Mass as he looks at selfie photographs sent by members of his congregation and glued to empty pews in Giussano, Italy, on March 22, 2020. Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte ordered all nonessential companies and factories to close nationwide on March 21 to stem the coronavirus pandemic that has killed 4,825 people in the country in a month. Piero Cruciatti/AFP via Getty Images

Denver People stand in freshly painted circles, six-feet-apart, as they wait in a two-hour line to buy marijuana products from Good Chemistry, on March 23, 2020, in Denver. Denver Mayor Michael Hancock announced liquor stores and marijuana dispensaries would be allowed to stay open as long as they enforced extreme social distancing practices during a three week shelter-in-place order starting March 24. Michael Ciaglo/Getty Images

New York A doctor examines Juan Vasquez for a COVID-19 test inside a tent at St. Barnabas Hospital, on March 20, 2020, in New York City. The Bronx hospital set up tents outside to triage possible COVID-19 patients before they enter the main emergency department area. Misha Friedman/Getty Images

China Images of medical workers from Fujian province, who were sent to Wuhan to help with the coronavirus outbreak, are displayed on buildings in Fuzhou, in China's eastern Fujian province, March 18, 2020. Str/AFP via Getty Images

Connecticut Health workers dressed in personal protective equipment await new patients at a drive-thru coronavirus testing station, March 23, 2020, in Stamford, Conn. John Moore/Getty Images

New Jersey Stuffed animals on the stools in Bischoff's, an ice cream parlor, serve as a gentle reminder that customers are not allowed to sit down, in Teaneck, N.J.,March 16, 2020.<BR><BR>Only two customers are allowed in the store at a time for take-out orders. The state's public and private schools will close indefinitely starting March 18 in response to the coronavirus pandemic, Gov. Phil Murphy said, while bars, restaurants and casinos shuttered at 8 p.m. on March 16. Teaneck, in Bergen County, has been a hotspot and the mayor has asked residents to self-quarantine. Seth Wenig/AP

New Jersey Chairs sit empty on the deck of a local restaurant, closed due to the coronavirus outbreak, tht looks out at the Manhattan skyline across the East River, in Hoboken, N.J., March 16, 2020. Eduardo Munoz/Reuters

New York Passengers space out their seating during a during rush hour on a subway, in New York City, March 17, 2020. The normally crowded subway system is significantly down in ridership with people staying home and working remotely. Mark Lennihan/AP

New York Medical professionals in protective suits wait to take information from people at a new drive-through COVID-19 mobile testing center in New Rochelle, N.Y., March 13, 2020. Alba Vigaray/EPA via Shutterstock

California A stretch of Interstate 8 is empty as a sign encourages hand washing on March 15, 2020 in San Diego, Calif. Sean M. Haffey/Getty Images

France Travelers wait in a check-in line on March 12, 2020, at Terminal 2E in Paris-Charles-de-Gaulle airport, in Roissy-en-France, a suburb of Paris, after announcement of a 30-day ban on travel from Europe by President Trump, due to the COVID-19 spread on March 11. The announcement caused confusion and led Americans to rush to return home. Benoit Tessier/Reuters

California Medical personnel help load passengers from the Grand Princess cruise ship onto airplanes at Oakland International Airport, in Oakland, Calif., on March 10, 2020.<BR><BR>The first passengers were taken ashore from the coronavirus-hit cruise ship that docked at the Port of Oakland on March 9, 2020, with infected travelers "being dealt with in proper isolation," said Vice President Mike Pence. Josh Edelson/AFP via Getty Images

China Medical staff celebrate the discharge of all the patients from a temporary hospital set up to treat people with the COVID-19 coronavirus in Wuhan, China, on March 9, 2020.<BE><BR>China closed most of its makeshift hospitals for coronavirus patients, some schools reopened and Disney resort staff went back to work on March 9, as things started to return to normal after weeks battling the epidemic. Str/AFP via Getty Images

Italy Police officers restrain a family member of an inmate outside the SantAnna prison in Modena, Italy, in one of the country's quarantine red zones, on March 9, 2020, after new visitation, furlough and parole restrictions were imposed because of the coronavirus outbreak.<BR><BR>Inmates in multiple Italian prisons rioted over the new rules, leaving 12 dead. Sixteen prisoners remain at large as of March 11, according to Justice Miniser Alfonso Bonafede. Piero Cruciatti/AFP via Getty Images

New York A public service announcement related to the coronavirus is seen on screen in the Times Square subway station in New York City as the number of cases in New York state rise, March 5, 2020.<BR><BR>New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo declared a state of emergency after the total number of confirmed cases rose to 76 on March 7. Justin Lane/epa-efe/rex/Justin Lane/EPA via Shutterstock

Washington Gene Campbell talks through a window with his wife of more than 60 years, Dorothy Campbell, at the Life Care Center of Kirkland, the long-term care facility linked to several confirmed coronavirus cases in the state, in Kirkland, Washington, March 5, 2020. David Ryder/Reuters

China Patients infected by the COVID-19 coronavirus (facing camera) wait to be transferred from Wuhan No.5 Hospital to Leishenshan Hospital, the newly-built hospital for COVID-19 patients, in Wuhan, China, March 3, 2020. AFP via Getty Images

Japan Teachers talk with students who are at home during an online class at Nagoya International School in Nagoya City, Japan on March 5, 2020. The emergency closure of schools in Japan began March 1 to combat the spread of the virus. Yoichi Hayashi/AP

Taiwan Pupils sit behind partitions during a class taught by Chen Ting-fang at Dajia Elementary School in Taipei, Taiwan, March 3, 2020. The school prepared the partitions as a way to prevent the spread of the new coronavirus. David Chang/EPA via Shutterstock

Japan Mask-clad commuters make their way to work during morning rush hour at the Shinagawa train station, in Tokyo on Feb. 28, 2020. A growing number of events are being cancelled or postponed around Japan and schools were closed till April as COVID-19 cases continue to increase. Charly Triballeau/AFP via Getty Images

South Korea Medical staff take samples from passengers with suspected symptoms of COVID-19 at a drive-through screening clinic at a hospital, in Daegu, South Korea, on Feb. 27, 2020. Yonhap/AFP via Getty Images

South Korea A woman wearing a mask to prevent contracting the coronavirus reacts as employees from a disinfection service company sanitize a traditional market in Seoul, South Korea, Feb. 26, 2020. Kim Hong-ji/Reuters

Iran Iranian workers disinfect the Shrine of Fatima Masumeh in Qom, Iran, on Feb. 25, 2020, to prevent the spread of COVID-19 which has reached the country.<BR><BR>Iran has the highest death toll outside China from COVID-19. Mehdi Marizad/AFP via Getty Images

Ukraine A demonstrator throws a stone at a police van during a protest against the arrival of a plane carrying evacuees from coronavirus-hit China's Hubei province in the village of Novi Sanzhary in Ukraine on Feb. 20, 2020.<BR><BR>Local residents blocked the road leading to a sanatorium where the evacuees will be held in quarantine for at least two weeks. Valentyn Ogirenko/Reuters

East Timor Students, evacuated from the Chinese city of Wuhan because of the coronavirus, arrive at President Nicolau Lobato International Airport in Dili, East Timor (also known as Timor-Leste) on Feb. 21 2020.<BR><BR>The students returned to East Timor after a quarantine period in New Zealand. The disease caused by the virus was officially named COVID-19 by the World Health Organization on Feb. 11. Antonio Dasiparu/EPA via Shutterstock

Japan Buses carrying Australian passengers from the quarantined Diamond Princess cruise ship leave a port in Yokohama, near Tokyo, Feb. 19, 2020.<BR><BR>Approximately 500 passengers left the ship Diamond Princess at the end of a much-criticized two-week quarantine aboard the vessel, which failed to stop the spread of the new virus among passengers and crew. Eugene Hoshiko/AP

South Korea A patient suspected of carrying the new coronavirus, named COVID-19, arrives at Kyungpook National University Hospital in Daegu, South Korea, Feb. 19, 2020.<BR><BR>Thirteen people in the city people were found to have the virus earlier in the day. Yonhap/epa-efe/rex/YONHAP/EPA via Shutterstock

China Medical personnel walk among patients with mild symptoms of the COVID-19 coronavirus at night in the temporary Fangcai Hospital set up in a sports stadium in Wuhan, China, Feb. 18, 2020. Str/AFP via Getty Images

China A couple wearing masks kiss at a main shopping area, in downtown Shanghai, China, as the country is hit by an outbreak of a new coronavirus, Feb. 16, 2020. Aly Song/Reuters

China Workers wearing protective suits and face masks disinfect a residential compound, following an outbreak of the novel coronavirus in the country, Taiyuan, Shanxi province, China, Feb. 15, 2020. CNS Photo via Reuters

China A man wears a protective mask as he has his temperature checked in a nearly empty and shuttered commercial street on Feb. 12, 2020, in Beijing. Kevin Frayer/Getty Images

China This photo taken on Feb. 13, 2020 in Nanchang, China, shows a train attendant gesturing to medical staff leaving for Wuhan, the epicenter of a novel coronavirus outbreak. AFP via Getty Images

Hong Kong A man wears a protective mask as he watches a movie, following the outbreak of coronavirus, in Hong Kong, Feb. 10, 2020. Tyrone Siu/Reuters

China A portrait of Dr. Li Wenliang is left at Li's hospital in Wuhan, China, Feb. 7, 2020. Dr. Li, regarded as a whistleblower on the latest coronavirus outbreak, died Thursday night from the disease, which triggered wide-spread mourning on Chinese media. via Getty Images

New York Holding signs saying "Wuhan Stay Strong" people participate in the annual Lunar New Year Parade in Manhattan's Chinatown, on Feb. 09, 2020 in New York City. Asian communities have been especially concerned about the virus appearing in their communities since the new coronavirus originated in China. Spencer Platt/Getty Images

Cambodia John Miller, from Orcas Island, Wash., reacts after he disembarked from the MS Westerdam, at the port of Sihanoukville, Cambodia on Feb. 4, 2020. The ship reached a friendly port willing to accept it, allowing the passengers to step ashore after weeks of uncertainty at sea. Heng Sinith/AP

India Medical staff wear a face masks inside an isolation ward opened as a preventative measure for coronavirus at the North Bengal Medical college and Hospital in Siliguri, India, Feb. 4, 2020. Diptendu Dutta/AFP/Getty Images

China Lu Yuejin pleads with police to allow her daughter to pass a checkpoint at the Yangtze River Bridge out of Wuhan, locked down because of the coronavirus outbreak, to receive cancer treatment, Feb. 1, 2020. Eventually, police allowed Lu and her daughter through to a waiting ambulance. Thomas Peter/Reuters

Indonesia Medical officers spray Indonesian nationals with antiseptic after they arrived from Wuhan, China, center of the coronavirus epidemic, before transferring them to the Natuna Islands military base to be quarantined, at Hang Nadim Airport in Batam, Riau Islands, Indonesia, Feb. 2, 2020. Antara Foto via Reuters

Thailand A sign displayed in a pharmacy states that protective face masks are out of stock in Bangkok, Jan. 31, 2020. Candida Ng/AFP via Getty Images

China Police stand at a roadblock at a bridge crossing the Yangtze River to Hubei province in Jiujiang, Jiangxi province, China, as the country is hit by an outbreak of a new coronavirus, Jan. 30, 2020. Thomas Peter/Reuters

China Hundreds of construction workers build new hospitals to tackle the coronavirus on Jan. 28, 2020 in Wuhan, China. Wuhan Huoshenshan hospital is expected to be put into use on Feb. 5th, with the capacity of 1000 beds. Getty Images

China A woman wearing a face mask travels in the nearly-empty subway, as the country is hit by an outbreak of the new coronavirus, in Beijing, Jan. 26, 2020. Carlos Garcia Rawlins/Reuters

Hong Kong Medical staff transfer a patient suspected of having contracted the new coronavirus at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Hong Kong, Jan. 22, 2020. Reuters