Updated 7:52 p.m.: Revised to reflect that the fire is out and all residents have been allowed to return home.

Businesses and residents around Mayfield Road and Forum Drive in Grand Prairie were ordered to evacuate Saturday afternoon because of a large natural gas fire that burned for several hours.

The National Weather Service sent out an alert about the fire and the city ordered evacuations just after noon Saturday. The Grand Prairie Fire Department said in a tweet that it was helping with evacuations.

The city asked residents or businesses between Mayfield Road and Interstate 20 and between State Highway 360 and Great Southwest Parkway to evacuate the area immediately using Mayfield or I-20.

Update: GPFD is evacuating businesses and residences within the immediate area. https://t.co/9Lg22blZho — Grand Prairie Fire (@GPTXFire) April 18, 2020

Traffic is shutdown at Mayfield Rd and SH 360 in Grand Prairie as a fire burns in the median near an Exxon gas station. A Grand Prairie police unit is seen partially burned nearby. Firefighters are taking a defensive position. @dallasnews pic.twitter.com/Wncjtk8Ild — Tom Fox (@TomFoxPhoto) April 18, 2020

Around 4:30 p.m., fire officials said some residents could return home except for those who live off of Atrium Drive from Highway 360 to Parham Drive; single-family homes addressed off Parham south of Mayfield and all homes on Carnation Court.

In addition, businesses, apartments and homes remained off-limits if they were north of Atrium, south of Red Hawk Drive, east of Highway 360 or west of Parham.

The fire was declared out around 7 p.m. and all residents were then allowed to return home.

Bill Murphy, assistant chief of the Grand Prairie Fire Department, told reporters at the scene that the department does not know what caused the fire. Murphy said the fire department responded to the natural gas leak and as they were setting up a perimeter of the area, the fire started.

The department evacuated three buildings at an apartment complex nearby, as well as a Furniture Mart, ExxonMobil and 7-Eleven. About 100 to 150 people were affected by the evacuations, Murphy said.