Brian Stelter attends the 11th annual CNN Heroes: An All-Star Tribute at the American Museum of Natural History on Sunday, Dec. 17, 2017, in New York. (Photo by Evan Agostini/Invision/AP)

It would be hard to find someone who had a more useless job than CNN’s Brian Stelter.

His job, it seems, like much of CNN, is to whine about President Donald Trump and about Fox News, say how horrible they are, while patting himself on the back.

But he had an admission to make today. Seems the constant pushing of the negative during the pandemic has even gotten to him.

Last night, I hit a wall. Gutted by the death toll. Disturbed by the govt's shortcomings. Dismayed by political rhetoric that bears no resemblance to reality. Worried about friends who are losing jobs; kids who are missing school; and senior citizens who are living in fear. — Brian Stelter (@brianstelter) April 18, 2020

Last night, I hit a wall. Gutted by the death toll. Disturbed by the govt's shortcomings. Dismayed by political rhetoric that bears no resemblance to reality. Worried about friends who are losing jobs; kids who are missing school; and senior citizens who are living in fear. — Brian Stelter (@brianstelter) April 18, 2020

Maybe it’s just me. I think we all are feeling the complete abnormality of the situation and are worried for our friends, family and country.

But maybe I would believe that he really was considering anybody other than himself if he and his network weren’t constantly pushing the negative and hyping the panic. There’s enough to be concerned about all on its own with the pandemic without making it worse by continually pitching division and attacks on the president and making this all about what the media thinks.

Even as he says he wants to share this with us, his newsletter is a litany of negative, without really any positive news except Netflix providing free service. There are positive things that one could put out there, from fewer people dying to the positives of medicines like hydroxychloroquine helping people (but that would require a little less TDS).

He talks about “reality.” But he’s constantly lacking perspective and pitching unreality. Even this, seems more a “look at how I feel” moment because it’s about how I feel, when most real journalists strive to keep themselves out of the story, because it’s about the story, not them. If they weren’t continuously pushing agenda, I might take them seriously.

One of the things that just seems incomprehensible is blaming the president rather than China, as well as that part WHO played in it all. That requires a journalist, rather than an opinion activist, to write the truth.

But you still wake up every morning ready to do battle for China and the DNC. Bravo, Brian. — Arthur Schwartz (@ArthurSchwartz) April 18, 2020

He’s not a journalist; he’s an actor playing a part. This role calls for a combination of obnoxious bitchiness and performative weakness for which Stelter is uniquely suited. pic.twitter.com/mQmHarmzp1 — David Reaboi (@davereaboi) April 18, 2020

Imagine how you might feel if the media had not focused entirely on demonizing the president, exonerating the country responsible for the outbreak, and detailing worst-case scenarios.

Had you been more interested in the truth and positive guidance it could have been better. https://t.co/inFuLZ6JDt — Brad Slager: aka Wuhan Solo (@MartiniShark) April 18, 2020

Exactly.