Trump wrongly accuses Pelosi of having 'parties in Chinatown' amid coronavirus crisis

President Donald Trump speaks about the coronavirus in the Rose Garden of the White House, Wednesday, April 15, 2020, in Washington. President Donald Trump speaks about the coronavirus in the Rose Garden of the White House, Wednesday, April 15, 2020, in Washington. Photo: Alex Brandon, AP Photo: Alex Brandon, AP Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Trump wrongly accuses Pelosi of having 'parties in Chinatown' amid coronavirus crisis 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

For more coverage, visit our complete coronavirus section here.

President Donald Trump continues to slam House Speaker Nancy Pelosi for "trying to have San Francisco parties in Chinatown" at the start of the coronavirus pandemic — a claim that misrepresents the context and timing of Pelosi's Chinatown visit.

Trump made the comment during a White House briefing Wednesday when talking about why he chose to cut off U.S. funding to the World Health Organization, an arm of the United Nations. One reason he gave was the W.H.O.'s lack of support for his restriction on travel from China to the United States.

“They didn’t want our borders closed. They’re criticizing me for closing the border,” Trump said. “I did that very early. By the way, I did that very early while Nancy Pelosi was trying to have in San Francisco parties in Chinatown because she thought it would be great.”

Crazy Nancy Pelosi deleted this from her Twitter account. She wanted everyone to pack into Chinatown long after I closed the BORDER TO CHINA. Based on her statement, she is responsible for many deaths. She’s an incompetent, third-rate politician! pic.twitter.com/uWNI7DCG3o — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 16, 2020

In his comments, Trump was referring to a visit Pelosi made to Chinatown on February 24. This was before San Francisco declared a state of emergency and more than two weeks before Mayor London Breed issued a stay-at-home order, one of the first such mandates in the nation. As the coronavirus was exploding in China, tourists and locals stopped visiting S.F.'s Chinatown. Pelosi visited Chinatown to show support for the neighborhood and encourage the community to support businesses. She did not encourage having "parties in Chinatown."

The day after Pelosi's Chinatown visit, Trump said the U.S. was in "very good shape" and coronavirus was a "problem that's going to go away."

"The people are getting better. They’re all getting better," he told reporters at the time. "And we think they’ll be in very good shape very, very soon."

On Thursday, Trump tweeted a KPIX news clip from Pelosi's February visit and claimed the speaker has deleted the video from her personal account. No such deleted tweet can be found on Politwoops, a site that tracks tweets deleted by politicians.

Fact check: We never posted this video. It’s obviously local TV coverage of the Speaker visiting Chinatown in San Francisco three weeks prior to the shelter-in-place order. https://t.co/sVCqbkD0DF — Drew Hammill (@Drew_Hammill) April 16, 2020

"She wanted everyone to pack into Chinatown long after I closed the BORDER TO CHINA," the president wrote. "Based on her statement, she is responsible for many deaths. She’s an incompetent, third-rate politician!"

Pelosi's Deputy Chief of Staff Drew Hammill debunked the president's tweet, writing, "Fact check: We never posted this video. It’s obviously local TV coverage of the Speaker visiting Chinatown in San Francisco three weeks prior to the shelter-in-place order."

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

Sign up for 'The Daily' newsletter for the latest on coronavirus here.

Amy Graff is a digital editor with SFGATE. Email her: agraff@sfgate.com.