CLOSE

It’s been a month since Juana stopped taking her key medication to treat the chronic vascular disease that attacks her immune system and debilitates her blood vessels. She has had three heart attacks in the past eight years.

Without the medication, Juana said it’s only a matter of time before her symptoms — burning sensations in her legs and feet, severe fatigue and difficulty walking — come back. Without treatment, she could eventually suffer organ failure and die.

Juana, who asked that her last name be withheld because she is undocumented, cannot afford the $220 monthly expense for the medication because the coronavirus pandemic has cost her husband much of his income.

Juana says she has stopped taking medication for a chronic illness since the pandemic cut her family's income. (Photo: Handout photo)

Juana’s predicament is a shared one: She is among countless undocumented immigrants for whom COVID-19 has only added to the substantial burden they already bear.

The undocumented community — an estimated 300,000 in Arizona — was already among the nation’s most vulnerable, and reverberations from COVID-19 have hit them harder. They are not eligible to apply for unemployment benefits, nor can they receive the $1,200 under the federal stimulus package signed on March 27 — even if their children are U.S. citizens.

Access to health care is also limited because many do not have health insurance. And they cannot qualify for full Medicaid or food stamps.

As of April 8, interim guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention advised that “essential” workers continue to work following potential exposure to the virus as long as they remain asymptomatic.

Yet essential workers, like those in the agricultural and service industries, are disproportionately undocumented, so they face an unpalatable choice: Risk exposure to keep a roof over their heads or lose their only source of income.

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coronavirus coverage relating to public safety free of charge. Support The Republic by subscribing to azcentral.com.

Financial hit

Under new federal guidelines for unemployment compensation, documented workers can collect unemployment benefits — in many cases higher than their weekly pay — if they have coronavirus related problems that prevent them from working.

“On one hand, (undocumented workers) are providing all of the things that we need as a country, such as the food that we eat...,” said Diana Tellefson-Torres, executive director of United Farm Worker Foundation. “On the other hand, we're not providing them legal status, we're not providing them with the type of hazard pay that should be provided given the risk that they're taking.’’

If someone is not an essential worker, the options are no better.

In the four weeks that ended on April 11, the Arizona Department of Economic Security reported that 345,800 workers filed for unemployment benefits. But that tally does not include an untold number of undocumented workers who also lost their jobs.

Without legal status, undocumented workers are “out of work, they're out of luck,” said Shefali Milczarek-Desai, director of the Workers' Rights Clinic at the University of Arizona. “Unless they have a coronavirus related reason to ask for the paid sick time and they're not actually terminated — they have nothing.”

In Arizona, paid sick leave can cover up to five days of work, regardless of immigration status. Under the Families First Coronavirus Relief Act, this leave can extend up to two weeks.

But, according to Milczarek-Desai, many undocumented workers in Arizona fear asking for this leave due to a culture that lives on from strict immigration enforcement during the 2000s spearheaded by then Maricopa County Sheriff Joe Arpaio. They fear their employers will retaliate by either firing them or cutting their pay, even though that is illegal.

Retaliation, she said, is “the number one thing most of my clients are afraid of right now.”

In California, Gov. Gavin Newsom announced that a new support fund with state would allocate $75 million to immigrant workers impacted by COVID-19. Undocumented workers there can expect to receive up to $1,000 per household, and can begin applying next month.

Health risks

But the fear doesn’t end with job loss. Juana said, and advocates agree, that many undocumented people avoid hospital emergency rooms out of fear of deportation and cost, regardless of a pandemic — even if their lives are at risk.

Jason Odhner, a registered nurse and president of Phoenix Allies for Community Health, said his free clinic is advising patients with COVID-19 symptoms to stay home and get telemedicine help from the clinic so they can avoid the ER.

Right now, community health centers and clinics where undocumented people receive care are only doing tele-visits and refilling medication. Many of these clinics, facing a falloff in volunteers, have stopped accepting new patients.

Outside of access, the cost of medicine and treatment is also a challenge, one Juana knows full well.

Since 2011, when Juana started having symptoms, she has paid for her medical expenses out of pocket. But her doctor visits ranged from $100-$400, and her monthly medications totaled $500, even with the help of discount programs.

To many undocumented residents, one medical benefit they can claim has a potential major downside. Through the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, they can apply for free emergency care. But many are reluctant to apply out of fear it can affect the measure used to assess how dependent immigrants will be on government services when they apply for a change in immigration status.

Despite the lack of benefits, Phoenix Councilman Carlos Garcia and other advocates note that undocumented people make up a large part of the state and its economy.

In Arizona, undocumented immigrants paid about $213.6 million in state and local taxes in 2014, the most recent year for which figures are available.

“I hope people can reflect on where their essentials are coming from, and moving forward, when the luxuries and privileges start coming back into their life, that they reflect how those things are able to happen because of the exploitation of others,” said Garcia.

It was 24 years ago when Juana left Mexico in search of a better life. She worked hard, raised three children and continues to contribute to her community, all from the home she’s lived in for more than two decades.

“It doesn’t matter what country we are coming from, as human beings we have rights, and we want to live a worthy life. We are only here to work and we contribute to this country greatly,” she said.

Resources in English

Health care access for undocumented people from United We Dream

Free Clinic Directory, a national resource

Undocuhealth mental health resources from United We Dream

Resources in Spanish

Spanish CDC guide

Arizona Department of Health Services

This article was prepared by students in an Investigative Reporting course at the Walter Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication at Arizona State University Email the reporters: Audrey Jensen: arjense7@asu.edu, Chloe Jones: chloeleejones06@gmail.com, Lidia Terrazas: lid.s.terraz@gmail.com

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-health/2020/04/18/virus-may-bring-greater-medical-and-financial-risks-undocumented/5154727002/