Then-National Security Advisor John Bolton in London last August. (Photo by Tolga Akmen/AFP via Getty Images)

(CNSNews.com) – The United States should respond to China’s COVID-19 “cover-up” and Taiwan’s efforts in the face of the pandemic by considering restoring full diplomatic relations with Taiwan, former National Security Advisor John Bolton suggested on Wednesday.

“In light of Taiwan’s efforts on coronavirus, Beijing’s opposition & its cover-up, the U.S. needs to consider again extending full diplomatic recognition to Taiwan,” Bolton tweeted. “As I said 20 years ago, U.S. interests are best served by giving Taiwan its unambiguous support.”

Bolton linked to an article he wrote in 2000, in his capacity as senior vice president of the American Enterprise Institute, arguing that a policy of “dual recognition” – recognizing and having full diplomatic relations with both China and Taiwan – “simply recognizes reality, the best grounding for any foreign policy.”

In 1971, the U.N. General Assembly voted to expel Taiwan and give the “China” seat to the communist People’s Republic of China. Eight years later, President Jimmy Carter cut ties with Taiwan and recognized the PRC.

China regards Taiwan as a rebel province that will ultimately be reincorporated into “one China” – by force if necessary. It refuses to have diplomatic relations with the handful of small countries that still have diplomatic ties with the island democracy.

The Taiwan issue is a non-negotiable “core interest” for Beijing, and the vast majority of the world’s nations comply with its wishes. So does the U.N. and its agencies – including the World Health Organization, which has not allowed Taiwan to take part in its annual assembly, even as an observer, without China’s permission, sporadically-granted.

Bolton argued in his 2000 article that the U.S. was “the only country willing and able to withstand the torrent of abuse that would flow from Beijing following dual diplomatic recognition.”

And if Beijing did threaten to cut ties with Washington over the issue, Bolton wrote, it “would demonstrate indisputably that it remains a rogue state, unentitled to the normal treatment it so much desires from America and the world.”

“In fact, it is extremely unlikely that the PRC would break ties with the U.S.; it would fulminate mightily and could exact some economic costs, but it would ultimately acquiesce,” he said, predicting that many other countries would follow the U.S. example.

Bolton contended that Taiwan indisputably met the criteria for statehood.

“By any accepted definition of customary international law and practice, [Taiwan] is a ‘state’: it has a stable government carrying out normal domestic functions over a defined territory with a stable population. It has a currency, a capital city, and all the other indications of statehood, as well as the clear capacity to make and honor international commitments with other states.”

“Arguing that Taiwan does not qualify as a ‘state’ ignores the unmistakable evidence,” he wrote. “In fact, it is precisely the overwhelming reality of Taiwan’s sovereign status that most aggravates Beijing’s hard-liners, and incites their apocalyptic rhetoric.”

(The 1933 Montevideo Convention on the Rights and Duties of States lays down for criteria for statehood: a permanent population; defined territory; an effective government; and the capacity to enter into relations with other states.)

Taiwan and the outbreak

The coronavirus outbreak that originated in the Chinese city of Wuhan late last year once again underlined the cost to Taiwan of its diplomatic isolation, and especially its exclusion from the WHO.

Having been badly burned during the SARS epidemic in 2003 – also badly mishandled by China – Taiwan acted quickly, putting in place a national response that stymied predictions it could be one of the countries worst affected as COVID-19 infections spread beyond China.

As early as January 2 Taiwan set up a national emergency operations center and put in place air and sea border controls, with likely cases quarantined. It reported its first COVID-19 case on January 22 and its first death on February 16.

As of Wednesday the island of 23 million people, which lies just 80 miles from mainland China at its nearest point, had reported only 395 cases and six deaths. Meanwhile China, whose figures some view as suspiciously low, had reported 83,350 cases and 3,346 deaths.

Beyond its borders, Taiwan’s approach has drawn praise and been emulated in other countries. It has also sent millions of facemasks to badly-affected countries including the United States and European Union member-states.

The cross-strait dispute has its origins in the civil war between Mao Zedong’s communists and Chiang Kai-shek’s nationalists, whose remnants retreated in late 1949 to the island of Formosa, or Taiwan.

Taiwan’s nationalists held the “China” seat at the U.N. until 1972, when the General Assembly passed a resolution declaring the representatives of the PRC to be “the only lawful representatives of China to the United Nations” and deciding to “expel forthwith the representatives of Chiang Kai-shek from the place which they unlawfully occupy at the United Nations and in all the organizations related to it.”

Although Carter cut ties with Taiwan in 1979 in favor of relations with Beijing, under the Taiwan Relations Act passed that same year the U.S. remains committed to helping the island to defend itself, and maintains quasi-diplomatic ties with Taipei.

The U.S. policy since the 1970s has been to acknowledged the position that there is “one China” but without explicitly recognizing Beijing’s claims to Taiwan.

Bolton served as undersecretary of state for arms control and ambassador to the U.N. in the George W. Bush administration, and as President Trump’s national security adviser from April 2018 until his departure last September.



See also:



Taiwan Hits Back at WHO: ‘We Know Better Than Anyone Else What it Feels Like to be Discriminated Against’ (Apr. 10, 2020)



Coronavirus Pandemic: Senior WHO Official Dodges Questions About Taiwan (Mar. 30, 2020)