Recent Stories

ROUTES Initiative to boost rural transportation infrastructure By land, water and air, transportation infrastructure binds together the United States of America. Every day, Americans take over a billion trips — usually on the nation's 4 million miles of roads. Rivers, streams and other obstacles are traversed via America's 616,096 highway bridges. Shares

Constructive collaboration: Improving infrastructure at our National Parks Investing in American infrastructure is one of President Trump's top priorities, and his commitment is clear: to "build gleaming new roads, bridges, highways, railways, and waterways all across our land." What's more, he has promised that "we will do it with American heart, and American hands, and American grit." It goes without saying that this should command broad, bipartisan support. Shares

America's Transportation Infrastructure Act: Bipartisan, historic and substantial No matter where you live in America, people agree that our roads and bridges are long overdue for an upgrade. Shares

States are meeting the challenge of infrastructure. Is Washington listening? The United States emerged from World War II as the undisputed global economic powerhouse in large part because national, state and local leaders were committed to building roads, ports, waterworks and other infrastructure that was the envy of the world. Shares

Let's work together to build a strong market for electric transportation America has a unique opportunity to build an economy of the future that is cleaner and stronger than ever before. Advances in technology and decreasing costs for natural gas, renewables and energy storage — along with energy efficiency gains and the carbon-free energy provided by existing nuclear power plants — are making it possible to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions across our economy, while keeping electricity affordable, reliable and secure. Shares

A D+ report card means there's a lot of work to do on infrastructure I'm proud to represent Maryland, which is often called America in Miniature because of our geographic and demographic diversity. Shares

Communities need alternatives to driving Investing in infrastructure has been a priority for Democrats, Republicans and Independents. We all agree we need to get it done sooner rather than later when the need will be more urgent and the remedies more expensive. Shares

Congress must keep rural America in mind when debating infrastructure It is exciting and encouraging that in the coming months, Congress may take up the important priority of infrastructure. As part of this debate, there are many complex and evolving challenges related to our national aviation network and our transportation system as a whole — Ubers of the sky, drones and, of course, broader issues related to ports, highways, rail and many others. In the midst of all of these important priorities, we encourage leaders to keep in mind the needs of rural America and the thousands of businesses, farms, industries and communities throughout our country that depend on general aviation and airports of all sizes. Shares

Strengthening water infrastructure Our country's infrastructure systems are in critical need of updating. Fortunately, infrastructure is one of the few things that truly has bipartisan support in Washington. Shares

America's waterways: Critical to our nation's economy and security One year ago last month, the U.S. Coast Guard published its Maritime Commerce Strategic Outlook, which describes its long-term vision for enabling maritime commerce and securing the maritime environment. In his introduction to this comprehensive plan, Admiral Karl L. Schultz, Commandant, observes: "Our waterways, a wealth of natural resources and marine transportation networks, remain critical to our prosperity, our security, and our identity as a Nation." Shares

Lessons in success: Nebraska sets examples for infrastructure legislation Whether it is driving to the grocery store, commuting to work or taking their family on vacation, Americans rely on a complex network of transportation infrastructure — from rural roads to bridges to interstate highways — in order to go about their daily lives. Shares

Closing the digital divide The idea of "unplugging" for a country getaway has a certain appeal. It is an escape, an opportunity to feel a little smug about selecting a destination that informs guests they shouldn't expect WiFi — free, or otherwise. Shares

Why would Congress add more dangers to firefighting? Among the many things firefighters learn in the field is that plastic burns hot and fast. It is a combustible material and releases toxic smoke and gases when burned. Shares

Congress should put aside political theatrics and fix our nation's infrastructure Every day, members of Congress seem to be increasingly consumed with the Washington Beltway's latest gossip or manufactured controversy. Shares

For upcoming infrastructure projects, 'Build Local, Hire Local' When an infrastructure project is started in an area, it's usually an inconvenience to the local community — sidewalks are closed, detours are enforced, businesses are affected. Shares

Bipartisan pipelines bill needs action to keep U.S. energy safe, efficient In September, the Protecting Our Infrastructure of Pipelines Enhancing Safety, or PIPES Act of 2016, expired, meaning that the Pipelines and Hazardous Material Safety Administration (PHMSA) is now operating on lapsed authorities. Shares

Critical mining, electrical infrastructure needed to meet growing energy demand As America looks to powering our future, there is no question our nation will need to build more electricity generation and transmission. To meet this demand, we will need more critical minerals and open new land access for the minerals and transmission capacity. This reality presents us with many challenges — but even more opportunities to thrive in the future. Shares

Transportation: A lifeline to the vitality of communities around the nation As Congress prepares to consider the needs of America's transportation infrastructure, we cannot afford to underinvest in transit, nor can we ignore the need to rethink wholesale how our transportation network should be designed in order to compete in the 21st century. Shares

Addressing infrastructure means investing in water When many Americans hear "infrastructure," they think of roads and bridges. In Central Washington, we think of water. Shares

Infrastructure investments will unleash America's full economic potential America is currently in the midst of historic economic growth. The strength of the U.S. economy is undeniable as GDP, job creation and unemployment figures continue to exceed all expectations. Shares

Soo Locks design, channel deepening plans underway When I came to Congress in January of 2017, I made the construction of a new lock in Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan, a top priority. Like many things in Washington, this goal didn't come without its significant challenges and obstacles — politicians dating back to the 1980s have been promising to address this infrastructure need. Bureaucratic red tape coupled with political inaction had stalled this critical infrastructure and national security need for decades. Shares