CLOSE FABRIC Tempe has shifted its manufacturing focus to make reusable, FDA-approved isolation gowns for health care workers at Banner and Dignity Health. Arizona Republic

Arizona Air National Guard service members delivered material from North Carolina to Goldwater Air National Guard Base in Phoenix on April 9, 2020, so Tempe fashion incubator FABRIC can make protective gowns for health care professionals in the state. (Photo: Tech. Sgt. Michael Matkin via Arizona Air National Guard)

The Fashion and Business Resource Innovation Center — or FABRIC — in Tempeis producing reusable protective gowns for health care facilities throughout the state with material delivered by the Arizona Air National Guard.

"This is exactly what we talk about when we talk about a whole-of-community response,” Maj. Gen. Michael McGuire said in a video provided by the Arizona National Guard.

The Arizona National Guard announced the completion of the mission in a Facebook post on April 10, a day after 20,000 pounds of material arrived on a flight from North Carolina.

FABRIC traditionally provides resources for fashion designers and entrepreneurs to make products locally, but recently pivoted to mitigating the shortage of personal protective equipment, referred to as PPE.

"Making PPE for our health care professionals is probably the highest level of making something that's safe and effective as you can get," Sherri Barry, co-founder of FABRIC, said in the video.

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coronavirus coverage relating to public safety free of charge. Support The Republic by subscribing to azcentral.com.

"When we approached this project it wasn't just about creating Dr. G's perfect design, it was also us learning and becoming the experts we needed to be so we could make stuff safe and effectively," she said, referring to Dr. Ronald Gagliano, the chairman of the department of surgery for Dignity Health in Arizona.

The organization obtained certification from the Food and Drug Administration to produce gowns for local health care facilities, and the expedited delivery of materials allowed the production of thousands of gowns to begin earlier than expected.

"With the huge increase in demand, this fabric would not have arrived until this coming Friday," McGuire said. "The virus is not on holidays or vacations or any of the rest, and we absolutely need to make sure our health care workers are protected."

The FDA recognizes four levels of isolation gowns, according to its website, from "Level 1" gowns that are for minimal-risk situationsto "Level 4" gowns forhigh-risk situations.

Arizona Air National Guard service members deliver material from North Carolina to Goldwater Air National Guard Base in Phoenix so Tempe fashion incubator FABRIC can make protective gowns for health care professionals in the state. (Photo: Tech. Sgt. Michael Matkin via Arizona Air National Guard)

FABRIC is certified to make the first two levels of gowns, and is awaiting approval of a "Level 3" design created with the help of Dr. Gagliano, Barry said in the video.

Gagliano, a former Army surgeon, said in a separate video provided by the Arizona National Guard that the Dignity Health medical group was looking to produce reusable isolation gowns to ease shortages of PPE until supply chains replenished.

"Going back to the day where I initially trained, we actually used cloth gowns in surgery," Gagliano said in the video. "Knowing that that was probably less of a demand than other things, we started working with groups to design a garment that could meet the needs across the spectrum of our health care providers."

The material used to create these gowns can be washed at least 100 times and provides better protection than disposable gowns currently being used, Gagliano said in the video.

Gagliano said the distributor in North Carolina was the only place supplying the type of material needed for the gowns and expressed his gratitude for the delivery in the video.

"For the Arizona National Guard, we're in a huge debt," Gagliano said.

Arizona Air National Guard service members delivered material from North Carolina to Goldwater Air National Guard Base in Phoenix on April 9, 2020, so Tempe fashion incubator FABRIC can make protective gowns for health care professionals in the state. (Photo: Tech. Sgt. Michael Matkin via Arizona Air National Guard)

Efforts by Arizona National Guard to help fight COVID-19

The Arizona National Guard has been helping food banks and grocery stores following Gov. Doug Ducey's order for them to assist the state with response tactics to the new coronavirus.

Members have transported goods for local grocery stores and packed food at Valley food banks.

Efforts are also helping the Navajo Nation, where at least 38 people have died from COVID-19.

Soldiers built a medical facility in Chinle, Arizona to be used as overflow space for patients, U.S Army Col. Tom Leaper, the Arizona National Guard State Surgeon, said in a March 30 press release.

'1 Million Gown Challenge'

FABRIC created a pattern and technical instructions for local designers and sewing enthusiasts interested in joining its efforts to produce isolation gowns, FABRIC co-founder Angela Johnson announced in a blog post.

The "1 Million Gown Challenge" invites the community to purchase fluid-repellent, antimicrobial material from home-improvement stores to sew into gowns for health care professionals.

If necessary, the organization will connect community members with health care facilities in need where they can deliver finished gowns.

The fabric is not FDA-approved, but is considered "substantially equivalent," Johnson said in the post. The patterns, along with more information about proper fabrics, can be found on FABRIC's website.

Text with our coronavirus team Sign up with your cellphone number below, and we'll send you text updates on the coronavirus in Arizona. You can also text us story ideas and questions. We promise not to use your number for anything else.



Reporter Chelsea Hofmann can be reached at email chelsea.hofmann@arizonarepublic.com and follow her on twitter @chofmann528.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/tempe/2020/04/15/coronavirus-arizona-national-guard-delivers-materials-health-care-ppe/5139246002/