Even as schools throughout the Bay Area remain shuttered in response to the coronavirus pandemic, many preschools and childcare centers are open for business — including facilities in Richmond and Antioch planning to reopen Monday.

Approximately 90 child-care programs in San Francisco are currently operating, according to the Children’s Council of San Francisco. That’s permitted under state guidelines and Bay Area shelter-in-place orders, provided the programs serve only children of workers in “essential businesses,” an extensive list ranging from health care and banks to grocery stores and gas stations.

Most programs open in San Francisco, about 87%, are in family homes as opposed to preschools or child-care centers, according to the Children’s Council, a nonprofit advocacy group for child care and early education. The organization plans to publish a full list of the programs this week.

“That number will continue to grow over the next few weeks, because families are realizing they need help to navigate this crisis,” Gina M. Fromer, the group’s chief executive officer, said Saturday in an interview with The Chronicle. “We’ve been working with the city every day. People are being cautious, as they should.”

Child-care facilities must follow specific guidelines to stay open, Fromer said, including a maximum of six children in a family-home program. There are protocols in place to ensure only kids of workers in essential businesses are accepted.

Fromer acknowledged the 90 open programs “sounds like a high number,” but she said there were about 1,000 providers in San Francisco before the shelter-in-place orders, serving approximately 8,000 children.

La Petite Academy, a preschool and childcare center with eight Bay Area locations, closed all but one of its local facilities last month. The preschool in Martinez stayed open to serve children of essential workers, said Teresa Addison, district manager for Learning Care Group, La Petite’s parent company. Learning Care Group has more than 950 locations nationwide.

Given increased interest from parents, the facilities in Richmond and Antioch will reopen Monday, Addison said.

They are required to follow guidelines established by California Community Care licensing (a state agency in the Department of Social Services) and the shelter-in-place order extended by Contra Costa and other Bay Area counties March 31. That order requires student groups of 12 or fewer and calls for kids to stay in the same group each day.

La Petite limits class size to 10 kids, Addison said, and teachers keep cots six feet apart and try to maintain social distancing. The preschool takes the temperature of each child when they arrive in the morning, to ensure it’s below 100.4; regularly uses hospital-grade disinfectant; and requires kids to frequently wash their hands for 20 seconds. Face masks are recommended but not required inside the facility.

Even so, Addison acknowledged the company’s “pretty rigorous safety checks” can only achieve so much in the effort to slow the spread of coronavirus.

“We’re taking as many preventative measures as we can, but children are children,” she said. “There are challenges, but at the same time we’re trained for this kind of stuff.”

There have been no reported illnesses at La Petite, she added.

Calls to several San Francisco preschools revealed many of them are closed in response to the pandemic. Mission Montessori on Fell Street, for example, will remain shut down through the end of May.

Little Tree Preschool on Mission Street normally has 22 kids but now is caring for only eight children of first responders, said Gigi Cochrum, the program director. She said the school is following strict guidelines but still faces severe challenges.

“It’s very stressful,” Cochrum said.

Asked about keeping preschool kids at least six feet apart, she said of the regulations, “That’s what they’d like, but explain that to a 3-year-old.”

Ron Kroichick is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: rkroichick@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @ronkroichick