Live Bay Area coronavirus updates: Grand Princess will dock in Oakland on Monday

The Princess Cruises Grand Princess cruise ship sits off the coast of San Francisco as it takes on supplies on March 7, 2020. The Grand Princess continued to circle off the coast of San Francisco after individuals tested positive for the coronavirus COVID-19. less The Princess Cruises Grand Princess cruise ship sits off the coast of San Francisco as it takes on supplies on March 7, 2020. The Grand Princess continued to circle off the coast of San Francisco after ... more Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Image 1 of / 144 Caption Close Live Bay Area coronavirus updates: Grand Princess will dock in Oakland on Monday 1 / 144 Back to Gallery

For the latest coronavirus news in the Bay Area, please visit SFGATE's newest update page.

LATEST, March 8, 11:30 a.m. The California Governor's Office of Emergency Services (Cal OES) announced Sunday passengers onboard the Grand Princess will "not be released into the general public."

The Grand Princess, the cruise ship being held off the California coast over coronavirus concerns, is scheduled to dock at the noncommercial Port of Oakland on Monday. From there, a disembarkment mission managed by state and federal entities will begin to unfold.

Passengers who require acute medical treatment and hospitalization will disembark first, followed by other guests. California residents will go to a federally operated facility within the state for testing and isolation while non-Californians will be transported by the federal government to facilities in other states.

Of the more than 3,500 people on the boat, 1,000 are Californians and they "will complete the mandatory quarantine at Travis Air Force Base and Miramar Naval Air Station," according to a statement from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. "Residents of other states will complete the mandatory quarantine at Joint Base San Antonio Lackland in Texas or Dobbins Air Force Base in Georgia. Throughout the quarantine, passengers will be monitored for symptoms of COVID-19."

"The entire mission is centered around protecting the health of the passengers, and ensuring that when the passengers disembark, the public health of the United States, the State of California, and partner communities is protected," a statement from Cal OES reads.

Federal and state officials chose the Port of Oakland for the disembarkment because it's one of the few ports that can accommodate the 951-foot-long ship.

"The Port of Oakland location was the easiest to seal off, securely move passengers toward their isolation destinations and protect the safety of the public," the statement reads.

The Port of Oakland is the fifth-busiest container port in the United States after Long Beach, Los Angeles, Newark and Savannah.

At least 21 people on the Grand Princess have tested positive for coronavirus, including 19 crew members and two passengers. The tests were initially administered to 46 people who were displaying symptoms. Vice President Michael Pence said in a press conference Friday that all passengers would be tested.

A 71-year-old passenger from a previous voyage on the same boat died of coronavirus on Wednesday at a hospital in Roseville in Placer County, near Sacramento. He had underlying health conditions. The Los Angeles Times reported that he had the virus before boarding the boat that traveled between San Francisco and Mexico, Feb. 11 to 21. This means the virus may have been circulating in the state for a longer duration than originally thought.

"Dr. Grant Tarling, the cruise’s medical officer, said the man — who later died in Placer County after leaving the cruise — sought medical care on the ship Feb. 20 and had been sick for several days," the Times reported. "Tarling said two waiters who served the man multiple times were subsequently infected."

UPDATE, March 7, 10:45 p.m. The Grand Princess will now dock at the Port of Oakland on Monday after Princess Cruises said "further modifications of the plan are necessary that will impact the arrival of the ship. The ship will now arrive in the Port of Oakland on Monday."

Guests who require acute medical treatment and hospitalization will disembark first, followed by other guests.

"According to Governor’s Office of Emergency Services, following health screenings, guests who are California residents will go to a federally operated facility within California for testing and isolation while non-Californians will be transported by the federal government to facilities in other states. Crew will be quarantined and treated aboard the ship," Princess Cruises said in a statement.

#GrandPrincess Update: The logistics plan went into further review by the state and federal authorities and the ship will not berth in Oakland on Sunday. It will now be Monday – time to be determined. — Princess Cruises (@PrincessCruises) March 8, 2020

UPDATE, March 7, 9:48 p.m. The Grand Princess, the cruise ship that has been holding off the California coast due to concerns over coronavirus, will dock at the Port of Oakland on Sunday, Oakland City Councilman Larry Reid told The Chronicle.

On Saturday morning, a "critically ill" passenger was taken off the cruise ship on a boat. The cruise line later stated the illness was not related to the coronavirus.

On Friday, Vice President Mike Pence said 21 people on board the ship are known to have coronavirus. There are roughly 3,500 total people on board, but only 46 were tested. Pence said the plan is to now test everyone on the ship and quarantine or treat as needed.

UPDATE, March 7, 6:35 p.m. All non-essential group events scheduled to take place in city-owned facilities have been banned for the next two weeks due to concerns over the spread of COVID-19, according to statement released Saturday by the SF Department of Public Health.

The order specifies city-owned facilities as: City Hall; Moscone Center and its associated buildings; Bill Graham Civic Auditorium; New Conservatory Theatre; War Memorial & Performing Arts Center, including Davies Hall, the Opera House and the Veterans Building; the Palace of Fine Arts Theatre; the SF Public Library; Pier 27; and Pier 35.

A "non-essential group event" is considered a gathering of 50 or more people.

The order lasts through March 20.

UPDATE, March 7, 5:48 p.m. The city of Gilroy confirmed its first case of novel coronavirus, police announced in a statement.

On Thursday, firefighters responded to a call of a resident who was experiencing chest pain. The patient was transported to Kaiser Santa Teresa, where the patient tested positive for COVID-19.

The firefighters, who have shown no symptoms, have been allowed to return to work, but will be monitored daily for the next 14 days, the statement said.

UPDATE, March 7, 3 p.m. Santa Clara County officials reported eight more cases of coronavirus on Saturday.

No details on the eight patients were released, and the county's public health department stated there will no media availability Saturday.

The cases bring the county's total up to 32, the most in the Bay Area.

UPDATE, March 7, 1:40 p.m. Six new cases of coronavirus have been recorded in San Francisco, bringing the city's total to eight.

The San Francisco Department of Public Health announced Saturday afternoon that all six presumptive positive cases are linked to previously known cases, and the individuals are isolating at home and are in good health. Two of the individuals are in their 20s, three are in their 40s and one is in their 50s.

UPDATE, March 7, 11:30 a.m. A Santa Cruz County resident who recently traveled on the Grand Princess cruise ship currently being held off the Northern California coast, tested positive for COVID-19, officials said Saturday.

The patient, whose age and gender were not released, traveled on the Feb. 11-21 trip from San Francisco to Mexico. An Alameda County resident who was on the same trip last month tested positive for COVID-19 on Friday.

That same cruise ship is now off the coast of Northern California and, so far, 21 people currently on board — 19 employees and 2 passengers — have tested positive for coronavirus.

This marks Santa Cruz County's first known case of the virus.

UPDATE, March 7, 9:20 a.m. The captain of the Grand Princess cruise ship currently being held off the Northern California coast told passengers a sick person on the ship was evacuated Saturday morning.

A passenger on the ship sent KGO a video recording of the captain announcing that the "critically-ill" person was evacuated via boat.

"At 7:15 this morning, we successfully evacuated the critically-ill guest," the captain said in the video.

The Coast Guard and CDC have not commented on the evacuation.

UPDATE, March 7, 7:09 a.m. Stanford University announced Friday that all classes will move to an online format in response to the coronavirus situation.

For the winter quarter, final exams will be take-home.

University Provost Persis Drell also announced that Admit Week, when prospective undergraduates visit the campus, has been canceled. It had been scheduled for April 23-26.

The announcement was later followed by news that a faculty member was found to have tested positive for coronavirus, according to NBC Bay Area. The employee worked at a clinic and has not returned since experiencing symptoms, the university told the news outlet.

Drell also said that two students are in self-isolation after possible exposure to COVID-19. The students have not shown any symptoms of coronavirus.

UPDATE, March 6, 8:14 p.m. A 72-year-old Sunnyvale man who died Thursday did not have COVID-19, Sunnyvale police announced Friday night.

Police responding to a medical call Thursday found the man unconscious and not breathing, and performed CPR. The man died, but family members later told police that the man had recently been on a cruise with two people who were suspected of having novel coronavirus.

Test results confirmed the man did not have COVID-19.

UPDATE, March 6, 7:23 p.m. An FBI agent who works in a satellite office in San Francisco has been diagnosed with COVID-19, the agency announced Friday night.

UPDATE, March 6, 7:17 p.m. A third resident of Alameda County has been diagnosed with COVID-19, the Alameda County Public Health Department announced Friday.

The patient, described as an older adult, was a passenger of the Grand Princess cruise ship from Feb. 11-21 and is currently hospitalized, officials said.

The patient’s family members are quarantined.

UPDATE, March 6, 5:22 p.m. San Francisco health officials announced the cancellation of the St. Patrick's Day parade, The Chronicle reported, as part of the "aggressive recommendations" to reduce the spread of coronavirus in the city.

The Department of Public Health recommended that all "non-essential" events such as concerts and sporting events be canceled for an initial period of two weeks, including any non-essential medium- to large-sized events at schools.

Vulnerable populations such as the elderly and those with weakened immune systems were encouraged to limit outings, telecommute if possible, and not attend large gatherings (of 50 or more) unless absolutely necessary.

Workplaces were also told to "suspend nonessential employee travel" as well as "minimizing or canceling large in-person meetings and conferences." Schools were encouraged to equip classrooms with hand sanitizers and tissues, as well as ensure a plan is in place in the event of citywide school closures (should it be necessary).

"We have been preparing for this," Mayor London Breed said in a released statement. "These recommendations are informed by the best public health information available and guided by experts in our own health department. They mirror the actions being taken in many other municipalities and are informed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines. These are important steps to protect our public health and are concrete things all of us can do to keep our community safe."

To see the full list of guidelines from San Francisco, head to the city's website here.

UPATE, March 6, 5 p.m. A high school basketball game in Atherton was canceled due to fears over the spread of the coronavirus.

Menlo was supposed to host Bishop O'Dowd for Friday night's CIF-NorCal Division I girls’ basketball quarterfinal, but the game was called off hours beforehand. Because it was a playoff game, Menlo forfeited by canceling, and O'Dowd will advance to the next round.

“As you can expect, there were 15 girls crying,” Menlo athletic director Earl Koberlein told the Mercruy News. “Very disappointed and very hard news to give. It’s not fair to them, they did nothing to deserve this.”

UPDATE, March 6, 3:10 p.m.: Santa Clara County officials announced four new confirmed cases of COVID-19 Friday afternoon, bringing the total number in the county to 24.

The Public Health Department described the four new cases:

An adult male who is being monitored at home in isolation. He had contact with another known case of coronavirus in Santa Clara County.

A female who is hospitalized. The source of her infection is under investigation.

A male who is hospitalized. He recently traveled back to the Bay Area from India.

A male isolated at home. The source of her infection is under investigation.

The four cases are unrelated, according to the county.

UPDATE, March 6, 2:45 p.m.: The Marin County Department of Health and Human Services confirmed there is only one known case of coronavirus in the county. The patient was transferred from Travis Air Force Base to a Kaiser hospital in Marin on Feb. 26.

The person, who is not a Marin County resident, is suspected to have contracted COVID-19 on the Diamond Princess cruise to Japan, then was quarantined at Travis AFB before being hospitalized.

Marin HHS says it is currently evaluating 11 of the 56 Marin County residents who returned to the county from another cruise, the Grand Princess, on Feb. 22, which has been linked to several other local cases of the novel coronavirus. The cruise from San Francisco to Mexico sailed between Feb. 11-21. The vessel since went on another voyage, from San Francisco to Hawaii, but hasn't been allowed to return. Vice President Mike Pence said in a press conference Friday afternoon, 21 people on the ship being held off the California coast tested positive for coronavirus, including 19 crew members and two passengers. Read more here.

UPDATE, March 6, 10:45 a.m.: Three new cases of COVID-19 were confirmed in Contra Costa County, officials announced Friday.

Two of the infected individuals were on board the Grand Princess cruise ship, reports KRON. The third Contra Costa patient was known to have contact with a coronavirus patient from outside the county, officials said.

All three individuals are being monitored in isolation at their homes.

UPDATE, March 5, 10:51 p.m.: An employee of Lockheed Martin in Sunnyvale has tested positive for COVID-19 on Thursday, according to a statement from the company.

"An employee based in Sunnyvale, California, who was previously flagged for potential exposure to COVID-19 has tested positive," the statement said. "From the moment we were aware of the possibility of exposure, appropriate steps were taken in coordination with local health officials. We have taken actions to ensure a safe workplace for employees and visitors, including deep cleaning of work areas and common spaces. The health and well-being of our employees is our top priority."

UPDATE, March 5, 9 p.m.: Multiple Bay Area tech companies are encouraging employees to work from home due to fears of a widespread coronavirus oubreak in the region.

On Thursday night, both Google and Facebook sent emails to employees informing them of the situation. The Google email, obtained by reporters from The Information, gave employees the "option" to work from home starting Friday, unless being in the office is "critical to business continuity."

The Facebook email was stronger, as it "strongly recommended" that Bay Area employees work from home. Facebook has multiple offices in the region.

Earlier in the week, Twitter encouraged its employees around the globe to work from home due to the virus.

UPDATE, March 5, 7:40 p.m.: The San Bruno Senior Center has been temporarily closed due to possible coronavirus exposure.

Officials announced Thursday that three individuals who were on the currently-offshore Grand Princess Cruise Ship visited the senior center over the past few weeks, and as a precaution, the facility will be closed until March 10.

Of the three, only one has shown symptoms.

"It is important to note that the City is not aware of any confirmed cases of COVID-19 in San Bruno at this time and we are working closely with county and state officials to further investigate any potential connections between the passengers on the Grand Princess and individuals who may have visited the Senior Center," the San Bruno Police Department wrote in a statement.

UPDATE, March 5, 6:26 p.m.: A 72-year-old Sunnyvale man who recently had been on a cruise with two passengers who are suspected of having COVID-19 died Thursday, Sunnyvale police said.

Sunnyvale police officers performed CPR, but not mouth-to-mouth, on the man after he was found unconscious and not breathing. The seven officers who responded to the call were placed under quarantine for several hours, but were allowed to return home late Thursday, Sunnyvale Police Chief Phan Ngo said at a press conference.

Family members told police that the victim had been on a cruise with two passengers suspected of having the COVID-19 virus. Ngo didn't not say whether the cruise was the Grand Princess, which is being held about 70 miles offshore from San Francisco.

It would be the second fatality related to novel coronavirus in California, if the cause of death is confirmed.

UPDATE, March 5, 2:30 p.m.: Lowell High School in San Francisco announced Thursday afternoon it is closing immediately.

"The District has just learned this afternoon that a relative of a Lowell High School student is being treated for COVID-19, also known as coronavirus. Out of an abundance of caution and for the safety and well-being of our community, we have decided to close the school and all events and gatherings for the time being," SFUSD said in a statement.

The student wasn't on campus after lunchtime Thursday, according to the district. The student hadn't reported any symptoms but was being monitored in quarantine.

All classes and events were canceled Friday and the district said it would provide an update before Monday.

Lowell parent Spring Utting said her daughter was sent home at 2:15 p.m. Thursday.

"She got an announcement in history class over the PA system," said Utting. "All the kids were in front of the school, milling around and calling [their parents] to get picked up."

In Santa Clara County, officials announced an additional six confirmed cases, bringing the total number of cases in the county to 20. The six new cases are three men and three women. Four of them had contact with other known cases and are being monitored at home. The other two are hospitalized (officials didn't say how they contracted the virus).

One of the 20 known infected patients has made a full recovery, officials said in a press conference.

Santa Clara County expects to see more confirmed cases in the coming days. Dr. Sara Cody, the county's public health officer, recommended in a press conference employers make it easier for employees to telecommute and to suspend non-essential work travel. She also ask those who are feeling sick stay home from work when possible.

The county is not recommending widespread school closures at this time, but would consider closures on a case-by-case basis if school employees or students were known to have come in contact with the virus.

See the latest numbers from all nine Bay Area counties at the bottom of this story.

UPDATE, March 5, 2 p.m.: The Children's Discovery Museum of San Jose announced it will be closing for several days "in an abundance of caution."

The museum said on Twitter an employee may have been exposed to COVID-19 and so the museum will be closed until March 10.

A charter school in Oakland also closed Thursday, reportedly due to possible coronavirus exposure. Oakland Unified School District said Aspire Monarch Academy, not the district, made the decision and couldn't provide more details.

KRON reports the school is closing for "an undetermined period of time because a staff member came into contact with someone who had been exposed to COVID-19 novel coronavirus. Neither the staff member or the person they came in contact with has tested positive."

UPDATE, March 5, 11:30 a.m.: San Francisco Mayor London Breed announced Thursday the city saw its first two confirmed cases of COVID-19, the novel coronavirus sickening thousands worldwide.

The patients are "contained" and being treated at two different hospitals, Mayor Breed said in a press conference. One patient is a man in his 90s with preexisting health conditions; he's hospitalized. The other is a woman in her 40s; she's hospitalized but in fair condition.

The Sonoma County Department of Health Services also confirmed Thursday a second positive coronavirus test in a resident who recently traveled on a Grand Princess cruise ship from San Francisco to Mexico, Feb. 11-21. The Department said both of the patients who have tested positive are being treated in isolation at a local hospital.

Now, Sonoma County DHS is working with the cruise line to identify other passengers who may have been exposed.

"The 14-day window of risk from these exposures will end Friday evening, March 6, 2020, and if passengers have not exhibited symptoms by then, they will be considered not at risk from the cruise ship exposure," said the department in a release.

In Santa Clara, three more individuals, all men, also tested positive for the virus. The results bring the total of those with COVID-19 in the county to 14. One is hospitalized; the other two, who were reportedly "close" in proximity to another affected person, are being monitored in their home.

Here's a look at coronavirus cases reported in Bay Area:

ALAMEDA COUNTY

Confirmed cases: 3 residents

On March 3, the city of Berkeley announced a resident tested positive for the virus after returning to the city from traveling. Officials didn't reveal the resident's travel destination.

A second Alameda County resident, who is a health care worker, was exposed to an infected patient at NorthBay VacaValley Hospital in Vacaville.

The third case involved an older adult who was a passenger on the Grand Princess cruise ship from Feb. 11-21.

CONTRA COSTA COUNTY

Confirmed cases: 4 residents, 3 people of unknown residence

The first resident of Contra Costa County tested positive for the coronavirus Tuesday. The resident did not have any known recent travel history.

On Friday, officials announced another three people in the county tested positive. Two had traveled on the Grand Princess Cruise Ship; one had contact with a coronavirus patient from another county.

Three patients transferred from Travis Air Force Base to Contra Costa County hospitals have tested positive, according to health officials.

MARIN COUNTY

Confirmed cases: 1 patient of unknown residence

A patient with laboratory-confirmed novel coronavirus was transferred from Travis Air Force Base in Solano County to a Marin County hospital on Feb. 27, according to health officials. The patient is now in isolation at home. The person is not a resident of Marin.

Two Marin residents who were experiencing some respiratory symptoms consistent with COVID-19 were admitted to local hospitals, the Marin Independent Journal reported Thursday. They were being tested for the virus, but results had not yet been returned.

NAPA COUNTY

Confirmed cases: 2 patients treated in Napa, then transferred out of county

Napa’s Queen of the Valley Medical Center treated two patients with suspected coronavirus. The two patients arrived in Napa on Feb. 17 after being transferred from Travis Air Force Base. They had originally been under quarantine for two weeks aboard the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan before being evacuated with other American residents to West Coast locations. The hospital reported the patients were transferred to another location on Feb. 24.

SAN MATEO COUNTY

Confirmed cases: 1 resident

County health officials reported a case in a resident who is presumed to have the virus on March 2; test results are pending.

A repatriated patient was also transferred to a county hospital on Feb. 27.

SANTA CLARA COUNTY

Confirmed cases: 32 residents

This county has the most confirmed cases. As of March 5, health officials have identified a total of 20: five were travel-related, 10 were from being in close contact with a known case, and nine contracted the virus without any known contact with other infected individuals.

Of the 20 patients, one has fully recovered.

Another person, a 72-year-old man from Sunnyvale, died on March 5. The man recently had been on a cruise with two passengers who are suspected of having COVID-19, but he hadn't been tested for the virus. The cause of death was under investigation as of March 5.

The first Bay Area case was identified in Santa Clara County on Jan. 31; a man returned from Wuhan and Shanghai on Jan. 24, and left his home only for medical care.

The county's second case was confirmed on Feb. 1 — a woman who visited Wuhan stayed at home except to go to a medical clinic on two separate occasions.

A fourth case was confirmed Feb. 29 in a resident who had household contact with the third case who was identified Feb. 28 as a 65-year-old woman with no travel history to a country with an outbreak and no known contact with an infected patient. She was the second case of "unknown origin" in the U.S. This patient had chronic health conditions and was hospitalized for a respiratory illness.

The fifth was a woman who officials said has chronic health conditions. The county's sixth and seventh cases were a husband and wife who recently traveled to Egypt.

The eighth person to test positive was an adult male who had household contact with an infected person in another county. He's also isolating at home. The ninth case is an adult male who had household contact with an infected patient in Santa Clara County. He's in isolation at home.

SAN FRANCISCO COUNTY

Confirmed cases: 8 residents, 3 non-resident patients

The San Francisco Department of Public Health announced Saturday that there are six new presumptive positive cases in San Francisco, bringing the total number of cases up to eight. All six cases are linked to previous cases, and the individuals are in good health.

Mayor London Breed previously announced Thursday two residents of San Francisco tested positive for the virus. One patient is a man in his 90s with preexisting health conditions; he is hospitalized in serious condition. The other is a woman in her 40s; she is also hospitalized, but in fair condition.

The patients are in separate local hospitals; the specific locations aren't being disclosed.

San Francisco has also treated three out-of-county patients in SF hospitals, according to local officials. One traveled in China, one was the spouse of that person, and one was from the cruise ship and had tested positive, with no symptoms.

SOLANO COUNTY

Confirmed cases: At least 2 residents, 1 healthcare worker who resides in Alameda County

The county received a lot of American evacuees from Wuhan and the Diamond Princess cruise at Travis Air Force Base. Some people who tested positive days after arrival were transferred to hospitals in and outside the county. According to the county's public health department, there were three confirmed cases of the virus as of March 2.

A female Solano County resident was the first case of "unknown origin" in the U.S. and was infected with virus without any travel history or contact with another known case. She first arrived at the North Bay VacaValley Hospital in Vacaville on Feb. 15 and was transferred to UC Davis Medical Center three days later, before being tested.

Two health care workers at the North Bay VacaValley Hospital were also infected with the virus. One is a Solano County resident; the other lives in Alameda County.

SONOMA COUNTY

Confirmed cases: 2 residents, 1 patient of unknown residency

Two Sonoma County residents who recently traveled on a cruise from San Francisco to Mexico tested positive for the virus. Both patients were being treated in isolation.

Another patient of unknown residency was evacuated from the Diamond Princess Cruise ship off the coast of Japan to Travis Air Force Base in Fairfield, before being treated in isolation at a Sonoma County hospital. The person tested positive but wasn't showing symptoms.

CALIFORNIA DEATHS: 1

As of March 5, two deaths related to coronavirus in California have been reported. In the first case, the Placer County Health Department said the deceased is an elderly resident of the county with underlying health conditions. The patient tested presumptively positive on Tuesday at a California lab and was likely exposed on a Princess cruise ship that traveled from San Francisco to Mexico, Feb. 11 to 21, health officials said. The patient was under treatment in isolation at Kaiser Permanente Roseville.

Amy Graff and Alix Martichoux are digital editors with SFGATE. Email them: agraff@sfgate.com, alix.martichoux@sfgate.com. Eric Ting is an associate digital reporter with SFGATE. Email him: eric.ting@sfgate.com.

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

A full list of online coronavirus resources: Where to get your questions answered

How to tell if you have a cold, the flu, or coronavirus

The worst myths and misinformation about coronavirus

What's the difference between coronavirus, the flu and the common cold?

Are the elderly at a greater risk for coronavirus complications?

US Surgeon General: 'Seriously people - STOP BUYING MASKS'

Bay Area company to expand coronavirus drug trials to other companies

CDC warns men with beards amid coronavirus scare