CLOSE

Phoenix-based Banner Health, Arizona's largest health system, is offering some employees voluntary, unpaid sabbaticals, officials confirmed Thursday. (Photo: Mark Henle/The Republic)

Phoenix-based Banner Health, Arizona's largest health system, is offering some employees voluntary, unpaid sabbaticals, officials confirmed Thursday.

The offer of unpaid leave comes as many hospitals and health systems in the state are experiencing revenue losses during the COVID-19 pandemic. Arizona Gov. Doug Ducey last month ordered hospitals to halt elective surgeries, which has significantly reduced workloads for some health care workers.

Some hospitals and health systems across the country have furloughed or laid-off workers because of a decline in revenue during the pandemic. Banner Health, the largest private employer in Arizona, has not had any layoffs or furloughs during the pandemic, officials said Thursday,

The nonprofit company's priority for employees with reduced workloads has been to assign those people to other duties, which remains the first option, a statement from Banner chief clinical officer Dr. Marjorie Bessel said.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Banner officials told The Arizona Republic that more than 1,500 employees have been "redeployed," meaning they are performing jobs outside their normal duties.

The sabbatical program is in part being offered for workers who want or need to be home during the COVID-19 pandemic, the statement said. Banner will continue to pay full employee and employer pre-tax benefit premiums for medical, dental and vision, the statement said. Employees will have to apply for the sabbatical and will need their supervisor's approval.

"As part of our focused efforts on maintaining safe medical environments and preserving critical personal protective equipment (PPE), we canceled elective surgeries and non-life-threatening procedures. As a result, some areas within Banner are experiencing fewer than normal patients and a reduction in work," the statement says.

"This is an unprecedented time and we are doing our very best to be nimble, responsive and supportive of our team member needs as conditions rapidly change, while providing safe, quality care for our patients and maintaining safe environments for all.”

In an interview Thursday, Bessel told The Arizona Republic that the sabbaticals are a response to the health system seeing less volume overall, and also to some employees' requests to be at home right now, typically to be with their children while they are not in school.

"We have a lot of employees who have a lot of disruptions to their lives," she said. "There are certainly some individuals in the health care industry, Banner Health included, who have a lot of work to do right now. ...Then there are other individuals who because of the lower (patient) census, they are not busy at this time."

Health care workers who staff outpatient clinics and surgery centers, for example, would have significantly less work than usual.

Ducey's March 19 executive order calls for halting non-essential surgeries that can be delayed “without undue risk to the current or future health of a patient," as a way of conserving personal protective equipment for health care workers.

Doctors are told to use their best judgment in determining whether a surgery is elective. A surgery is not elective if delaying it would be life-threatening or cause permanent physical dysfunction, impairment or hospitalization.

Reach health care reporter Stephanie Innes at Stephanie.Innes@gannett.com or at 602-444-8369. Follow her on Twitter @stephanieinnes

Support local journalism.Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/money/business/health/2020/04/16/coronavirus-pandemic-banner-health-unpaid-leave-employees-covid-19-news/5144921002/