President Donald Trump listens as Response coordinator for White House Coronavirus Task Force Deborah Birx speaks during the daily briefing on the novel coronavirus, which causes COVID-19, in the Brady Briefing Room of the White House on April 16, 2020, in Washington, DC. (Photo by MANDEL NGAN/AFP via Getty Images)

(CNSNews.com) - The Trump administration unveiled its plan to reopen parts of the U.S. economy on Thursday, the first phase of which involves employers encouraging telework when possible, returning employees to work in phases, and allowing special accommodations for vulnerable populations.



Vulnerable individuals are encouraged to shelter in place, while the public is encouraged to continue social distancing and avoiding socializing in groups of more than 10 people. Non-essential travel should be minimized.



As far as schools are concerned, if they are currently closed, they should remain closed. The guidance also prohibits visits to senior living facilities and hospitals. Large venues including sit down dining, can operate under strict physical distancing protocols, Dr. Deborah Birx, response coordinator for the White House Coronavirus Task Force announced Thursday.



Gyms can be opened under strict physical distancing and sanitation protocols, and elective surgeries can proceed on an outpatient basis.



For phase two of the plan to reopen the economy, individuals are advised to avoid social settings of more than 50 people. Non-essential travel can resume. When in public, people are encouraged to maximize physical distance, and vulnerable individuals are encouraged to continue to shelter in place.



Employers are advised to continue encouraging telework, close common areas, and non-essential travel can resume. Special accommodations for vulnerable populations should continue.



Schools, day cares and camps can reopen in phase two, Birx announced. Visits to senior living facilities and hospitals are still prohibited. Large venues can operate under moderate physical distancing protocols, and elective surgeries can continue on an outpatient and in-patient basis.



There is no timeline on each phase of reopening the economy, Birx said.



In phase three, vulnerable populations can resume public interactions, but practice social distancing. Low-risk populations should minimize time spent in crowded places, and employers can resume unrestricted staffing of worksites.



“Phase three, I won't go through in detail but it's essentially returning to our new normal with all of what we talked about through all phases continuing the good hygiene practices, continuing the respect for spaces between individuals because we know that we still have an issue with asymptomatic spread,” Birx said.



“I believe with this plan that we are both confronting the issue of finding symptomatic individuals through our networks with early alerts as well as those who come and present two different hospitals and emergency room, with testing and contact tracing but critically have put in place what we believe is a safety net through asymptomatic sentinel surveillance that is centered around our most vulnerable group, between nursing homes and native American people, and indigenous populations and inner-city groups that we know may be in multi-generational households and have unique risk,” she said.