A significant discrepancy in case mortality rate can also be observed when comparing mortality rates as calculated and reported by China NHC: a CFR of 3.1% in the Hubei province (where Wuhan, with the vast majority of deaths is situated), and a CFR of 0.16% in other provinces (19 times less).

Specialists are trying to explain the anomalies in China’s reporting which are likely unable to be explained. The data likely is bogus and the media and the medical community is giving it too much credence.

The World Health Organization (WHO) gives China support as well. As we reported yesterday, the Director General of the WHO spoke on March 3, 2020 and shared this related to the coronavirus:

While many people globally have built up immunity to seasonal flu strains, COVID-19 is a new virus to which no one has immunity. That means more people are susceptible to infection, and some will suffer severe disease. Globally, about 3.4% of reported COVID-19 cases have died. By comparison, seasonal flu generally kills far fewer than 1% of those infected.

This statement led to the greatest panic in world history as the media all over the world shared and repeated that the coronavirus was many, many times more deadly than the common flu.

The problem is his statement is false. It was not accurate!

The Gateway Pundit reported Monday, that the coronavirus fatality rate reported by the media was completely inaccurate and the actual rate is comparable to seasonal flu – the media was lying again. The false reporting of the coronavirus fatality rate of 3.4% in the elite media began with the statements made by the WHO in early March.

Here’s a summary of the analysis updated with today’s latest numbers proving the Director General’s statement was very misleading and materially false:



N/A – not available

A look at the numbers:

** Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus used the actual number of deaths due to coronavirus divided by confirmed cases to get his 3.4% mortality rate number (from last week – today’s number is near 4%)

** Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus then compared the actual coronavirus mortality rate to an estimated flu mortality rate of 0.1% — The US flu mortality rate is based on an estimated 22,000 deaths divided by an estimated 36 million flu cases giving a 0.1% mortality rate.

Ghebreyesus compared apples to oranges and his numbers were completely inaccurate!

The WHO consistently praises China’s actions related to the coronavirus. In report after report China is praised. An example is at the WHO’s website where they claim:

In a bid to boost its response to the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak, China mobilized four out of five WHO classified Emergency Medical Teams (EMTs) to Wuhan, the centre of the epidemic, on 3 February 2020. EMTs are teams of health professionals, usually made up of doctors, nurses and paramedics who treat patients needing medical care during an emergency. They come from governments, charities, the military and international organizations. These trained and self-sufficient medical teams come prepared to assist in international and national emergencies to avoid over burdening the local systems.

The international community should wake up and realize that the data and reporting coming out of China and the WHO needs to be verified. Their records to date are appalling.