Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., addresses reporters at the Capitol in Washington, Thursday, Sept. 26, 2019, as Acting Director of National Intelligence Joseph Maguire appears before the House Intelligence Committee about a secret whistleblower complaint involving President Donald Trump. Pelosi committed Tuesday to launching a formal impeachment inquiry against Trump. (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite)

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) has been holding up the refunding of the Paycheck Protection Program, meant to help small businesses and save American jobs.

The program has already helped thousands if not millions of Americans.

Here’s President Donald Trump outlining some of the businesses saved.

KHON Honolulu reports that #PaycheckProtectionProgram loans have been secured “to save more than 100,000 local jobs so far”https://t.co/xEMFw4zye7 pic.twitter.com/82rQe6Mw2s — RNC Research (@RNCResearch) April 14, 2020

The Paycheck Protection Program has provided over 1 MILLION loans to help American businesses & workers in this crisis. Demand's so high that the money is set to run out this week, yet Dems are BLOCKING more relief funding to push their left-wing agenda.https://t.co/RcyWwpyiuH pic.twitter.com/CwDNu89kth — Oversight Committee Republicans (@GOPoversight) April 14, 2020

But the money has run out and Pelosi is blocking it, holding the livelihoods of Americans in the balance, trying to get more of her political agenda items.

Here she is bragging about Democrats blocking it.

Nancy Pelosi: “I congratulate the Senate Democrats” for objecting to $250 billion in small business relief. Pelosi is shameless. The #PaycheckProtectionProgram is saving jobs all across America & Pelosi is taking a victory lap on MSNBC for blocking it. pic.twitter.com/qh1azqO8JB — Steve Guest (@SteveGuest) April 15, 2020

Virtually none in liberal media have called her out for this.

But we would like to note that there is one person on one network who at least has broached the subject, and it’s a network that one might not expect.

Julia Chatterley is an anchor and correspondent for CNN International based in New York.

Here she is calling out Congress and saying that the Congress needs to “wake up” and pass the refunding of the Paycheck Protection Program, that it’s about “stopping job losses today, saving businesses today.”

CNN’s Julia Chatterley on Democrats blocking #PaycheckProtectionProgram funding: “wake up,” the PPP is about “stopping job losses today”https://t.co/goh8O3wECX pic.twitter.com/q909EFautE — RNC Research (@RNCResearch) April 17, 2020

You can see John Berman’s eyebrows raise, as though he gets that Chatterley just seemed to go off script with that one.

Pelosi hardest hit.

It’s insane, isn’t it, that President Donald Trump was allegedly impeached for holding up aid to Ukraine (when nothing was actually held up), meanwhile Pelosi is costing thousands of jobs, likely every day this continues and this is the only media calling that out.

So we give props to Chatterley for bringing it up. Republicans are doing everything they can to put pressure on to get it signed but so far Pelosi is still holding out.