The bloody primary battles between Republican senators and tea party activists that have cost the party dearly for years aren’t materializing yet in 2016.

Headed into next year’s primary season, virtually none of the 22 GOP senators who are running for reelection have drawn viable challengers so far. At this point in past cycles, several prospective tea party candidates were already gathering steam, with outside groups preparing to spend millions in an effort to oust veteran incumbents.

Advertisement

The dearth of serious candidates has prompted leading conservative groups like the Club for Growth and Senate Conservatives Fund to focus instead on defending conservative Utah Sen. Mike Lee and backing candidates in open seats in Florida and Indiana, where Republican senators are not running for reelection. And neither group has plans to attempt to derail GOP senators in their primaries — at least not yet.

“We aren’t currently supporting any primary challengers, but we stand ready to do so if strong, viable candidates step forward,” Ken Cuccinelli, head of the Senate Conservatives Fund, said Tuesday.

The potential cease-fire could save the party from squandering scarce resources in an election season where Democrats maintain a shot at winning back the majority.

David McIntosh, head of the Club for Growth, said his group right now is focused on backing a handful of conservative Republican senators like Lee, Tim Scott in South Carolina, Ron Johnson in Wisconsin and Pat Toomey in Pennsylvania. The judicious approach, he said, has to do partly with the fact that Republicans now have to worry about preserving the majority.

“This cycle the Republicans have a majority in the Senate,” McIntosh said. “There’s an effort among all elements of the coalition — conservatives and party Republicans — to have that majority be successful.”

The election cycle is still young, of course, and things could certainly change. For instance, two tea party favorites, former Rep. Joe Walsh in Illinois and Kansas physician Milton Wolf, wrote in emails Tuesday they are still weighing runs against their respective states’ sitting senators in 2016.

“Republicans around the state are unhappy with him and don’t believe he can win next November,” Walsh said, referring to moderate GOP Sen. Mark Kirk, who is seeking a second term. “I hope to have a decision made very, very soon.”

But whether Walsh gains traction among the right remains to be seen. While Walsh would be the “type of candidate we think well of,” McIntosh said, “I think the consensus would be to spend the resources elsewhere.”

“I don’t think there is a problem with being active in the primaries to keep the majority as long as you’re strategic about it and are not trying to upset an incumbent in Illinois, where it’s going to be hard for any Republican to win,” he added.

The change in tone comes after the party has warred with itself over the kinds of candidates to nominate — rock-ribbed conservatives who stay pure to party principles or more mainstream candidates who are prone to compromise but might stand a better chance of winning a general election.

Last year, the battle reached a fever pitch, though the conservative insurgents failed time and again to defeat the GOP establishment’s picks — notably in Mississippi, where the Club for Growth went all-out to defeat Sen. Thad Cochran but lost in one of the ugliest fights of the election season, and in Kentucky, where the Senate Conservatives Fund went hard against Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell, only to see its favored candidate, Matt Bevin, get trounced.

“I just think that there’s a pragmatism that perhaps we haven’t been quite as good at in previous cycles,” said Sen. Roger Wicker (R-Miss.), chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee.

Still, 2016 offers some tempting targets for conservative firebrands angry at GOP senators for straying from party principles, even though they seem safe from intraparty fights.

Sen. Rob Portman (R-Ohio) thought his pro-gay marriage stand in 2013 would surely draw a primary challenger, but none has emerged so far. Toomey, who was a lead author of Barack Obama-backed gun legislation in 2013, also drew sharp rebukes from the right, but the National Rifle Association seems likely to give him a pass.

Sen. Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, who lost her GOP primary to tea party firebrand Joe Miller in 2010 only to win the general election in a write-in campaign, could be vulnerable again. But Alaska political operatives are uncertain whether a competitive primary challenger will emerge this time around.

And Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), who has been vilified by the activist right for years for his authorship of immigration reform legislation, among other matters, has so far attracted only one potential GOP opponent — state Sen. Kelli Ward. But she has yet to consolidate much support among the party faithful, including the Club for Growth.

“I’m guided by the old Irish saying, ‘a fight not joined is a fight not enjoyed,’” said McCain, who insisted that Ward could be a “formidable” foe.

McIntosh, whose Club for Growth is sharply critical of McCain’s past positions on campaign finance reform and taxes, said the group was awaiting word on whether conservative Arizona Rep. Matt Salmon would jump into the race, saying “he’s the type of candidate we’d support.”

But in a brief interview in mid-June, Salmon said he was taking “no” steps toward a potential run.

“I’m just focusing on my job here [in the House],” Salmon said.

In 2010, Bob Bennett of Utah was caught flat-footed and ousted amid a conservative uprising in his state — as was Dick Lugar two years later in Indiana. But unlike those election cycles, McIntosh said 2016 doesn’t offer as many “liberal Republicans,” so “you aren’t seeing as strong of an effort to support an alternative” at the local level.

Cuccinelli, however, said there are “many” Republican senators who should be booted out of office, though he declined to single anybody out.

“Many Republicans in Washington have lost their way and should be replaced with principled conservatives,” said Cuccinelli, a former Virginia attorney general.

Heeding lessons of the past, Republicans have moved aggressively to stock up multimillion-dollar war chests to scare away prospective foes. Plus, they have worked behind the scenes to lock down support from influential party activists and House members.

Portman, the Ohio Republican, has been perhaps the most aggressive in that regard. By February, Portman had already secured more than 500 endorsements from GOP elected officials in the state, including the entire state Senate Republican Caucus, most statehouse members, nearly 90 percent of the local county chairs and the entire House GOP delegation. This, despite in 2013 becoming the first Senate Republican to back gay marriage.

“I’ve got a conservative voting record, and I’m proud of that,” Portman said.

Democrats say that even if Republican senators escape primary fights, it won’t affect their path to the majority, where they have to defend only 10 seats compared with 24 for the GOP. Portman, for one, will be in one of the most competitive races in the country, assuming the former governor, Democrat Ted Strickland, can emerge from his own primary fight.

“I think that’s something we anticipated, and I don’t think that has much impact on our ability to be successful,” said Sen. Jon Tester (D-Mont.), head of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, referring to the dearth of GOP insurgents challenging incumbents.

Rep. Martin Stutzman, R-Ind., and Rep. Ron DeSantis, R-Fla. are pictured. | AP Photo

In Kansas, Wolf is sending some signals that he may run against Sen. Jerry Moran — after the radiologist lost by 8 percentage points to Sen. Pat Roberts in 2014 in a bitter primary battle. In an email, he took a whack at Moran for his stewardship of the National Republican Senatorial Committee last cycle, particularly its tactics to save Cochran in Mississippi, along with the senator’s votes on taxes and spending.

“I have not yet reached a decision about 2016 but I am hearing from fired-up Kansas Republicans across the state who are fed up with the failed and feckless career politicians who are tarnishing our party at both the federal and state levels,” Wolf said.

But unlike 2014, when Roberts came under attack for lacking a home in the state and for losing touch with voters, Moran has long sought to remain visible. Even in the last weeks of Roberts’ hard-fought campaign last fall, Moran was on the road doing his own public town hall events, prompting grumbling within GOP ranks.

Still, Moran defended his stewardship of the NRSC.

“We had significant success in getting a Republican majority,” Moran said in an interview.

In open seats in Florida and Indiana, both the SCF and the Club for Growth plan to make their mark. Both groups are backing Rep. Ron DeSantis in Florida, while the SCF has endorsed Rep. Marlin Stutzman in Indiana, and the Club for Growth is planning to engage soon in the Hoosier State’s primary.

Even with the backing of outside groups, both DeSantis and Stutzman have made some key staff hires that suggest they are trying to seek peace with the party establishment, even though serious primary fights are likely to emerge.

Wicker said his party committee would avoid engaging in open-seat primaries this cycle. But he added that he hopes the same kind of conflicts that led to hiccups in every cycle since 2010 could be avoided next year.

“It would be a good thing if we could hang onto our winners — and therefore have a better chance of preserving our majority,” Wicker said.