Soon after she was diagnosed with late-stage pancreatic cancer in January, Janet Glass began going every other week to Englewood Health in New Jersey for a three-day chemotherapy treatment in hopes of defeating the disease.

But because of concerns that the coronavirus outbreak could kill a cancer patient whose immune system is severely compromised, Glass’s most recent appointment was canceled.

“I was very surprised by the call,” said Glass, 72, a North Bergen resident. “I knew they were canceling elective surgeries. I get that you can’t get a nose job these days. That makes sense. But chemo is something else.”

Glass is not alone.

Doctors have already started making critical decisions about treatment for patients who have cancer, and who may be more likely to die if they contract a coronavirus infection because their immune systems are compromised from chemotherapy.

For weeks, oncologists who treat cancer patients have been considering the possibility of postponing some treatments over concerns about risks, said Len Lichtenfeld, deputy chief medical officer of the American Cancer Society in Atlanta.

Within the past week, he said, calls began coming in from areas hit hard by the coronavirus, indicating that those concerns had become a reality.

Lichtenfeld said some radiation and chemotherapy treatments have been postponed, along with some surgeries.

He said people undergoing chemo already have suppressed immune systems, so stopping treatment wouldn’t necessarily boost their ability to combat the virus. But physicians are “trying to avoid patients coming to the hospital if we can” because of concerns about increasing potential exposure, Lichtenfeld said.

“We may have a delay for several weeks for elective surgeries,” he said. “Hopefully things will calm down” and surgeries and other treatments can be completed.

Man stole thousands of N95 masks, police say:They were recovered and are now being donated

'A terrible decision to make'

Ruth Egan, 69, of Bergenfield, New Jersey, said she was given a stark and terrifying choice to make last week at Holy Name Medical Center. Her doctor told her to stop chemotherapy and come back in a month, she said, because she would likely die if she contracted the coronavirus.

“This is a terrible decision to make,” said Egan, who said she has myelodysplastic syndromes, or MDS, a type of cancer that can occur after a person is cured of leukemia. Don’t take chemo "because you might get the virus," she said. "Then the cancer kills you.”

Holy Name said in a statement that it has not canceled any appointments, but has offered patients "the option of postponing based on each individual case." The hospital "continues to provide chemotherapy treatment appointments based on National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines," and evaluates each case "to determine if the risk outweighs the benefit."

The National Comprehensive Cancer Network said it has made recommendations to change chemotherapy drugs when possible to something less toxic and to spread out treatments in some cases. But it said it has not recommended halting or delaying treatments.

“Once someone is on treatment, it’s almost always a bad decision to stop in the middle,” said Dr. Wui-Jin Koh, the chief medical officer for the network. He said doctors and patients should discuss treatment options, adding that "the patient has the final say."

Eric Whitman, medical director of cancer care for the Atlantic Health System, said doctors would “pause” treatment for cancer patients who test positive for the coronavirus.

That hasn’t happened yet, he said. Other patients are being evaluated “on a case-by-case basis,” he said, and in some cases it may be possible to put off some treatments while determining “which ones need to be done right now.”

“We all acknowledge we can’t stop treating them,” Whitman said of cancer patients. “Our goal is to continue treatment.”

Lichtenfeld, of the cancer society, said delays in treatment “could have future consequences for outcomes” and that researchers years from now may measure the impact of the virus on cancer care.

Dialysis patients

The coronavirus outbreak has had implications for other patients. People whose kidneys have failed and need dialysis, which is done at outpatient centers, are now segregated into groups that are kept apart from one another – regular patients, those who tested positive for the virus and those who have symptoms like a cough or fever.

"These dialysis sessions cannot be stopped," said Thomas Salazer, the chief of nephrology at Hackensack University Medical Center, adding that patients would die without the treatments.

He said that "several" hospitalized coronavirus patients have had their kidneys fail after going into shock. They are now on dialysis. It's not known whether they will need to continue the sessions after recovering from the virus, he said.

Egan, the Bergenfield woman, said she could have continued with her chemotherapy treatments at Holy Name but was scared off by her oncologist.

She said her white blood cell count typically goes down a couple of weeks after she gets a five-day course of chemotherapy and that her doctor was concerned about her exposure if she came in for blood tests after the treatments. She said she stays away from people and always wears a mask in public.

“I put two masks on since I’ve been on chemo,” she said. “People are slobs. They cough on you.”

'I have no choice'

A longtime Spanish teacher before her retirement in 2013, Glass was diagnosed with late-stage pancreatic cancer on Jan. 4.

It came as a shock, considering she was otherwise in excellent health, had no family history of cancer and is a non-smoking vegetarian.

Glass began chemotherapy on Feb. 13.

Every other Wednesday she goes to Englewood Health's Infusion Center, where staff members attach a pump of chemotherapy drugs into a valve in her chest. She spends Thursday at home with the pump attached, as it slowly feeds her the drugs. On Fridays, she returns to Englewood and the pump is removed.

Last week, she was told her appointment for March 25 was canceled.

The news left her with mixed emotions. She realizes her medical team is acting in her best interests, because the hospital is a place where she could easily catch the disease.

“It’s worrisome,” Glass said. “There is some scientific basis for giving me chemo every other week. I suppose this could be a setback.

“But honestly, part of me is thrilled because I get a break from it,” she added. “The side effects are severe.”

Glass's chemotherapy causes her chills, low-grade fevers and heightened sensitivity to cold, causing her to wear gloves when she gets something out of the refrigerator.

It also dehydrates her to the point of dizziness. She fainted a few weeks ago, and her medical team attributed that to dehydration. On her off weeks from chemotherapy, she goes to Englewood each Wednesday to get an IV of saline solution to hydrate her.

Englewood Health is continuing to treat patients at its Infusion Center and Cancer Center and throughout the hospital. The patient's physician makes the call whether to postpone treatment, hospital executives said.

“This is an unprecedented time for everyone, and there will be difficult decisions that have to be made about whether to delay treatments such as surgery, radiation therapy or chemotherapy," said Dr. Steven Brower, medical director of Englewood's cancer treatment center. "We are following national recommendations to provide appropriate care with our main intent of protecting our most vulnerable immunocompromised patients."

Even before the coronavirus outbreak, doctors told Glass to avoid public places such as trains, buses and shopping centers because her immune system was suppressed by chemotherapy drugs, she said.

Now it's even more important. And Glass realizes that the hospital is a place where she could easily catch coronavirus.

“You’re there with patients, visitors, staff – so there is exposure,” she said. “But I'll have to be there eventually. I feel I’m in a position that I have no choice.”

Lindy Washburn of NorthJersey.com contributed to this article.

Email: fallon@northjersey.com Twitter: @newsfallon

Email: koloff@northjersey.com Twitter @AbbottKoloff

The US had a chance to learn from anthrax, SARS, H1N1 and Ebola:So why is the federal coronavirus response so messy?

'I can't jump in front of the microphone and push him down':Fauci addresses Trump coronavirus claims