Getty

It’s no secret that recessions and dips in economic activity come and go in waves. With headlines increasingly warning of a pending economic slowdown, there are several indicators which point in that direction.

If the sound of a recession makes your stomach lurch, there’s a good chance you’re not financially prepared if it were to happen soon. The government shutdown that began in December 2018 and dragged on through January 2019 clearly highlighted the negative impact and incredible hardship that most Americans would face if they missed a few paychecks.

So if you don’t feel ready for the next recession, now is the time to take action. The steps to sound personal finance decisions are much more simple than you realize. The hard part is actually executing your plan and sticking with it, especially when there’s so many distractions in our everyday lives.

To begin, you need to know what your financials goals are and why they are important. The key here is to write them down and re-evaluate them periodically as you solidify your financial footing. If you have a spouse, you’ll want to go through this exercise together.

For some families, their goals might include paying down credit card debt so they no longer have it looming over them, while for others it may be increasing their 401(k) contributions. You’ll decide what makes the most sense for you and your loved ones.

Focus On Financial Literacy First

Once you know the specific targets you want to reach, you’ll need to become financially literate. The internet has more than enough information to get you started. If you feel stuck and aren’t sure where to start, I run a personal finance site called The Finance Twins, which is full of free introductory personal finance materials and tools.

Understand The Difference Between Assets And Liabilities

All purchases are not created equal. If you’re focused on building wealth and securing your financial future, you’ll want to maximize assets that hold and potentially grow in value, while limiting liabilities or financial obligations.

One common fallacy you’ll want to be aware of is that purchasing a vehicle is smart financial decision since it is an asset. While technically true that your car is an asset from an accounting standpoint, your auto is a depreciating asset and quickly loses its value. Focus instead on investments and savings as true appreciating assets.

Your Money Is Important, So You Need To Treat It That Way

You would never start a project or a cross-country road trip without a plan. Yet, so many people manage their money by crossing their fingers and hoping for the best.

You’ll want to develop a plan to save, budget and invest your money. Focus on your savings rate, or the amount of money you are able to save from every paycheck. A rough guideline that you’ll want to aim for is to invest 15% of your income for the future. A Traditional or Roth IRA is a good place to start if you are already taking advantage of a workplace retirement plan.

Remember, getting your spending in check isn’t an exercise in how much pain you can tolerate to pinch a few pennies. It’s about designing a life and standard of living that is sustainable and still provides you with the same amount of happiness and pleasure, while allowing you to save and invest for your future.

Ask For Advice If You Feel Stuck

If you’ve gone a few weeks with a toothache that won’t go away, chances are that you’ll eventually find yourself staring at a bright light at the dentist's office. However, when your finances are hurting, you probably aren’t running to a financial advisor or financial planner for help.

It’s true that you might not get the same immediate gratification from visiting a financial planner because it takes time and effort to notice a difference in your financial life, but that doesn’t make it any less important. After all, you’ll be glad that you’ll have the money to afford a visit to the dentist if you need one.

Not all financial advisors are created equal so take the time to find someone you life and trust. You’ll be glad you took the time to shop around and didn’t go with the first person you met with, unless they are the right fit.

Leverage Technology To Stay Financially Focused

There are countless apps and websites related to tracking your spending, managing your money, or setting up a budget. Take advantage of your favorite ones to stay on track with your goals. There are even Instagram accounts dedicated to inspiring positive financial decisions. An extra five minutes everyday looking at your financial situation instead of looking at pictures of cats on your newsfeed will go a long way.

Similarly, research has shown that small nudges can make a large difference in influencing your behavior, so it will help you if you go on this journey with a couple of friends. Something as simple as a friend texting you in the morning asking about your side hustle, might be all you need to actually go out and earn some extra money.

Develop An Investor Mindset

If your goal is to have financial freedom, then you need to start acting like it and have an investor-like mindset. You need to approach your everyday financial decisions with your goals in mind. Start by paying your future self first as soon as you get your paycheck. Don’t just save whatever is left over. Your savings rate will tell you how you are doing. If you aren’t earning enough money to reach your goals, you need to find ways to make more money.

The cost of living has increased faster than wages have over the past few decades, which means it’s harder than ever to live a comfortable life. But it’s still possible.

It’s only a matter of time before the next recession hits, but you’ll be glad you made the decision to set a solid financial foundation for your family.