UPDATED: 12:29 p.m. EDT, Oct. 1 —

Amber Guyger was found guilty of murdering Botham Jean when a jury returned its verdict on Monday. The verdict was returned less than 24 hours after the jury began deliberating Monday following closing arguments. The trial, which started Sept. 23, was originally expected to take two full weeks.

Keep reading to find a detailed timeline of the shooting on Sept. 6, 2018, up until the guilty verdict was delivered more than one year later.

The case has captured international attention in part because of Guyger’s implausible excuse that she thought she was in her own apartment and shot Jean because she thought he was a burglar.

READ MORE: Botham Jean’s Mother Speaks Out Before Murder Trial

Many questions surrounded the trial, including the apparent concern that Guyger wouldn’t get a fair trial, something that apparently took a back seat to getting justice for Jean, an innocent and upstanding member of society. Jean’s mother said that her son didn’t deserve to die like that. In what seemed to be a telling sign, local Dallas police reportedly gave orders that suggested they were preparing for Guyger to be acquitted.

The entire scenario surrounding the shooting was still incomprehensible to many people, even one year later: a police officer supposedly so exhausted from work that she mistook her apartment for the unit under her own, forced her way in and fired off her service weapon immediately. It was not clear whether the door was locked or why Guyger started shooting, especially since her story has repeatedly changed and Jean isn’t alive to explain. Nonetheless, he was shot and killed. The St. Lucia native was only 26 years old.

It took a full 72 hours for Guyger to finally be arrested and charged with manslaughter on Sept. 9. After only a few hours in custody, she was released on a bond of $300,000.

There have been several pressing questions about the handling of the case by the Dallas Police Department. Why were the five search warrants for Guyger’s home never executed? Why did it take 18 days for her to be fired? Why has Guyger’s story changed and where is she now? There were suspicions of a cover-up, and the world has been outraged. The killing of Botham Jean is another example of how Black lives and bodies are seen differently in this country. As we all know, if a Black cop killed a white woman in her apartment, there would be swift justice.

See the disturbing timeline below:

1. August of 2018 Botham Jean leading worship. This is who Amber Guyger killed. pic.twitter.com/NDv2zFoj1p — DJ Wade-O (@djwadeo) September 14, 2018 Source:false Botham Jean moves into South Side Flats apartment complex in Dallas, Texas. He is deeply involved in his church and works for the accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers.

2. September 6, 2018 Botham Jean's family asked the Dallas Cowboys to take a knee yesterday.



As always, the players refused.



I've never seen a bigger, stronger group of frightened men in my entire life.



READ HER WORDS HERE: https://t.co/8yBl0UKnPN pic.twitter.com/jfjgWC9Ejt — Shaun King (@shaunking) September 17, 2018 Source:false Around 10 p.m., Botham Jean is in his home. While the details are unclear because only Guyger can tell the story, the 26-year-old is gunned down by the Dallas police officer. Guyger’s defense is that she went to the wrong apartment and killed him because she thought he was a burglar.

3. September 9, 2018 Mugshot of Dallas Police Officer Amber Guyger released after she was arrested on manslaughter warrant in shooting death of Botham Jean https://t.co/a2T3wNREX9 pic.twitter.com/4564d9UrjQ — WTTE FOX 28 (@fox28columbus) September 10, 2018 Source:false After 72 hours, Guyger finally turns herself in. She is charged with manslaughter and released on bond.

4. September 10, 2018 I want you to see what Dallas Police Officer Amber Guyger is doing.



Her new story is that #BothamJean's door was unlocked & she yelled for him to put his hands up.



But look at her first story. The door was locked. She kept trying to unlock it. Put down items in her hands, etc. pic.twitter.com/aOvdk15O7g — Shaun King (@shaunking) September 10, 2018 Source:false In an affidavit released on Monday, September 10, Guyger claims Botham Jean “ignored” her commands, blaming the victim for his own death. Also, her story changes, the door went from being locked to unlocked. Also, witness come forward saying they heard a woman’s voice saying, “Let me in!” And a man’s voice saying, “Oh, my God. Why did you do that?” right after the sound of a bullet.

5. September 11, 2018 From another angle, here is a door closing in the same apartment building Botham Jean lived in.



When Dallas PD Officer Amber Guyger says his door was open, it's almost as if she thinks nobody else lives in that building and can demonstrate that the doors close automatically. pic.twitter.com/MRXvZG1pVr — Shaun King (@shaunking) September 11, 2018 Source:false By Tuesday, September 11, it was reported that Guyger now claimed Jean’s door was ajar. A resident proved it was impossible for the doors at the complex to be a jar.

6. September 12, 2018 Source:false Protesters shut down a city council meetingm chanting “No justice, no peace.” Mayor Mike Rawlings abruptly ended the meeting.

7. September 13, 2018 Yesterday, I attended the funeral of Botham Shem Jean. It was one of the most moving experiences I have ever had. Botham was a man of God, a graduate of Harding University, a worship leader, and a brother in Christ. We shared the same city and the same small religious tribe. pic.twitter.com/5BxQyxPgaM — Collin Packer (@collinpacker) September 15, 2018 Source:false On the day of Botham Jean’s funeral, the Dallas police disgustingly released an affidavit saying the there were small traces of marijuana found in his apartment. Lee Merritt, an attorney for Jean’s family, said, “I think it’s unfortunate that law enforcement begin to immediately criminalize the victim — in this case, someone who was clearly was the victim that has absolutely no bearing on the fact that he was shot in his home.”

8. September 14, 2018 Source:false In a powerful press conference, Allison Jean, Botham’s mother, rips into the Dallas police department for releasing details that they found marijuana in his home. She said, “The information received yesterday is, to me, worse than the call that I got on the morning of Friday, Sept. 7. To have my son smeared in such a way, I think shows that the persons who are really nasty, who are really dirty and are going to cover up for the devil, Amber Guyger.” She also added, “Give me justice for my son because he does not deserve what he got. I will not sit back and see that justice does not prevail.”

9. September 18, 2018 Source:Radio One Dallas Police Chief Renee Hall is being slammed by the Jean family and activists for not firing Amber Guyger. However, she says she is “prohibited” from firing her due to “civil service laws” — but she failed to cite the law. Dallas attorney Peter Schulte told ABC 8, “When I read Chief Hall’s statement today, it just doesn’t make much sense to me. I don’t know if it’s ignorance or being naive, but it doesn’t make any sense legally.”

10. September 21, 2018 The Prime Minister of St. Lucia speaks out on the Botham Jean case.https://t.co/PnuaNzywEh — NewsOne (@newsone) September 21, 2018 Source:false St. Lucia’s Prime Minister Allen Chastanet slams the Dallas police for the handling of the Botham Jean case, saying, “Some people want to go further, that this was home invasion and therefore is subject to capital punishment. Now again, all these things are starting to play out because capital punishment is what the whole world has been trying to convey to us that we should not practice, yet here is a state in America that still practices it.” He continued, “This is the inconsistency or hypocrisy, if you want to call it that, that exists in the global context that we have to deal with.”

11. September 24, 2018 pic.twitter.com/Bvt4ixHGsl — Dallas Police Dept (@DallasPD) September 24, 2018 Source:false Guyger is finally fired, when only days before Police Chief Hall said she couldn’t fire her. Nonetheless, Jean family is still asking for justice, they are demanding her charges be changed from manslaughter to murder.

12. September 26, 2018 RIP Botham Shem Jean. He was a 26-year-old black man from St. Lucia who was shot and killed in his own apartment by a white Dallas police officer Thursday night. The officer reportedly faces manslaughter charges. https://t.co/50TnpC1Gb9 pic.twitter.com/shRJnkBcxK — Keith Boykin (@keithboykin) September 8, 2018 Source:false The family sued the city of Dallas for civil rights violations. According to Fox 4 in Dallas, “The attorneys say the lawsuit will argue that Jean’s civil rights were violated when off-duty Dallas Police Officer Amber Guyger mistakenly went to his apartment and shot and killed him, thinking she was encountering an intruder in her apartment.”

13. September 29, 2018 Today would have been Botham Jean's 27th birthday. We need to keep his name alive. We need police officers to be transparent, and we must remove biases from their ranks. We can't turn away from America's history of racial divisions, but we can pave a different path forward. pic.twitter.com/0ZfIZ8F1xv — Rep. Marc Veasey (@RepVeasey) September 29, 2018 Source:false September 29 was Botham Jean’s birthday. He would have been 27. See the video of Rep. Marc Veasey honoring Jean,

14. October 5, 2018 Source:false Dallas DA Faith Johnson accused of mishandling the case. She continuously defends herself, telling people to “trust” her. She is also accused of being more focus on reelection rather than charging Guyger with murder.

15. October 17, 2018 Another interesting meme shared by Dallas Police Officer Amber Guyger. pic.twitter.com/LJ9WQRnmEz — Shaun King (@shaunking) September 14, 2018 Source:false In an interview with Jordan Chariton, Jean’s family attorney. Lee Merritt, says there are social media posts with Amber Guyger bragging about being violent. He said, “She bragged about being violent, being short tempered. She bragged about use of force and she spoke out adamantly against things like kneeling [during the anthem] and said the NFL died of ‘Colin’ cancer.” That is an obvious reference to Colin Kaepernick. See one of the posts above.

16. October 17, 2018 Another interesting meme shared by Dallas Police Officer Amber Guyger. pic.twitter.com/LJ9WQRnmEz — Shaun King (@shaunking) September 14, 2018 Source:false In an interview with Jordan Chariton, Jean’s family attorney. Lee Merritt, says there are social media posts with Amber Guyger bragging about being violent. He said, “She bragged about being violent, being short tempered. She bragged about use of force and she spoke out adamantly against things like kneeling [during the anthem] and said the NFL died of ‘Colin’ cancer.” That is an obvious reference to Colin Kaepernick. See one of the posts above.

17. October 19, 2018 Botham Jean’s Mother On The Trump Administration: ‘Some People Just Don’t Care About Lives’ https://t.co/OROFcCf6kN — @pyramidfire (@pyramidfire) October 19, 2018 Source:false Botham Jean’s mother says she has not heard from Trump administration. She says, “What we would like to see is great attention to this case by top government officials in the United States. We have heard nothing from Washington, D.C., and it really gives a feeling that some people just don’t care about lives.”

18. October 22, 2018 Details Of Botham Jean’s Family Lawsuit Against Dallas Are Revealed https://t.co/rV93QLNQf0 pic.twitter.com/Tp2mZtUf7c — Praise 104.7 FM (@PraiseRichmond) October 23, 2018 Source:false Details of the family lawsuit against the city of Dallas revealed. “Jean’s parents say they want their lawsuit to not just focus on how their son died, but to change how police officers are trained about when to fire their weapons,” the Dallas Morning News reported. In addition, “The Jeans also fault [Dallas Police Chief U. Reneé] Hall for turning over the case to the Rangers and say Dallas police should have kept investigating. Hall has said she turned over the case in an effort to be more transparent.” After the backlash, Hall has not commented on the Botham Jean case in weeks.

19. October 22, 2018 Details Of Botham Jean’s Family Lawsuit Against Dallas Are Revealed https://t.co/rV93QLNQf0 pic.twitter.com/Tp2mZtUf7c — Praise 104.7 FM (@PraiseRichmond) October 23, 2018 Source:false Details of the family lawsuit against the city of Dallas revealed. “Jean’s parents say they want their lawsuit to not just focus on how their son died, but to change how police officers are trained about when to fire their weapons,” the Dallas Morning News reported. In addition, “The Jeans also fault [Dallas Police Chief U. Reneé] Hall for turning over the case to the Rangers and say Dallas police should have kept investigating. Hall has said she turned over the case in an effort to be more transparent.” After the backlash, Hall has not commented on the Botham Jean case in weeks.

20.

21. November 26, 2018 Source:Dallas Police Department A grand jury began hearing the case. Activists said they would protest if she is not charged with murder.

22. November 30, 2018 #BREAKING Dallas grand jury charges former police officer Amber Guyger with murder for killing Botham Jean in his own apartment. https://t.co/SLcNgPnZEO — NewsOne (@newsone) November 30, 2018 A grand jury returned an indictment to charge former police officer Amber Guyger with murder for killing Botham Jean. The panel reportedly decided there was enough evidence to show the manslaughter charges Guyger was initially facing were not strong enough.

23. December 28, 2018 Source:Getty DallasNews.com reports Officer Jared Waddle used pepper-ball against protesters. According to department records, the officer “technically shouldn’t have been able to use a PepperBall gun.” However, officials found, in their preliminary report, that the cop “used the gun in a way that was ‘consistent’ with the department’s general orders.” (Photo by Dallas Police Department via Getty Images)

24. December 30, 2018 Amber Guyger appears to continue to be protected by the city of Dallas.https://t.co/tYC6y0iXBz — NewsOne (@newsone) December 31, 2018 FoxNews4.com reported, Dallas released an “extremely small portion of the Botham Jean incident report after an open records request from FOX4.” Incident reports are usually detailed, however, “in this case, all but the first four sentences, which contain basic information, are blacked out.” Outside of the offense being listed as manslaughter, the majority of the other details were blacked out, including if Guyger was under the influence of alcohol or drugs. A trial is scheduled for Aug. 12.

25.

26. April 4, 2019 Source:Getty The trial was supposed to begin Aug. 12 but is delayed because Guyger’s lawyers need to “adequately prepare.” The trial is pushed to Sept. 23 — well past the year-mark since Jean’s death.

27. April 30, 2019 The 911 call Amber Guyger made moments after shooting Botham Jean in his own home is released. “I’m f*cked,” she said at one point during the call before later adding, “I’m going to lose my job.” After asking the operator to send a “supervisor,” Guyger kept repeating, “I thought it was my apartment.” Guyger says later in the call that “I’m so tired.”

28. June 5, 2019 Botham Jean’s Mother Breaks Silence On Amber Guyger’s 911 Call https://t.co/y44q5FCXMw — ghetto intellectual™ (@kzshabazz) June 5, 2019 According to an interview with Sight Magazine, Allison Jean said she believed the 911 call was leaked to gain sympathy for Guyger. Jean said, “Listening to it, it sparked some anger within me because I’m not hearing the dispatcher pay much attention to him. I didn’t hear the dispatcher ask about his condition, whether he was breathing, whether he was responsive…And I’m wondering whether it was because it was a police-involved shooting that the victim didn’t matter.”

29. August 30, 2019 Dallas police officers were reportedly given new orders relating to Amber Guyger's murder trial for killing Botham Jean in his own home.



Jury selection begins Friday.https://t.co/RBHayvIUF1 — NewsOne (@newsone) September 3, 2019

30. September 5, 2019 "I'm not raising my expectations," Allison Jean said about whether justice will be served in Amber Guyger's murder trial for killing her son, Botham Jean, in his own home in Dallas.



Jury selection starts tomorrow, the anniversary of the shooting.https://t.co/cECezs80cQ — NewsOne (@newsone) September 5, 2019

31. September 6, 2019 A year ago today Botham Jean was killed in his home by a cop because she was "tired" -- (yep, the fatigue defense). He was only 26 years old. A year later, still no trial (jury selection finally starts today). #BothamJean pic.twitter.com/ndK3Q4vNZV — Clay Cane (@claycane) September 6, 2019 A year after Botham Jean is killed, jury selection has finally began.

32. September 16, 2019 NEW - Amber Guyger's murder trial for killing Botham Jean in his own home will stay in Dallas. Judge Tammy Kemp ruled against a change of venue motion. #JusticeForBotham https://t.co/UOZSHDJGVV — NewsOne (@newsone) September 16, 2019 A judge ruled that Amber Guyger’s trial will not be moved out of Dallas.

33. September 18, 2019 Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. once said “Justice too long delayed is justice denied.” It has come to my action that the ... Posted by Lee Merritt on Tuesday, September 17, 2019 The lawyer for the Botham Jean family slams the Dallas Police Association for trying to delay the trial over The Texas State Fair.

34. September 20, 2019 Botham Jean’s sister hopes Amber Guyger trial will bring closure for family https://t.co/NzxmefgYby — FOX 4 NEWS (@FOX4) September 19, 2019 Botham Jean’s sister, Allisa Findley, spoke out and said, “We’re seeking justice for Botham and I think justice looks like for his killer to be found guilty of murder.”

35. September 23, 2019 Amber Guyger killed Botham Jean over a year ago. The trial stared today.https://t.co/jFI5944rgG — NewsOne (@newsone) September 23, 2019 After months of delay, Amber Guyger’s murder trial begins.

36. September 24, 2019 Botham Jean’s neighbor Joshua Brown gave an emotional testimony.

37. September 25, 2019 Texas Ranger David Armstrong said he doesn’t believe Amber Guyger committed a crime but the judge ruled jurors won’t be allowed to hear his testimony.

38. September 27, 2019 "I wish he was the one with the gun that killed me."



Amber Guyger, ex-Dallas police officer accused of killing unarmed man in his apartment, breaks down in tears on the stand as she recounts the night's tragic events. https://t.co/EHJNIYULgM pic.twitter.com/ryoJkObpuF — ABC News (@ABC) September 28, 2019 Amber Guyger speaks out publicly for the first time and takes the stand.