The coronavirus isn’t stopping new Bay Area restaurants from opening — even though they can only operate with takeout and delivery.

Here is a running list of what has opened since the Bay Area’s shelter-in-place orders began on March 17.

April 15

Comforting Japanese curry is available for takeout or delivery in Burlingame thanks to newcomer Curry Hyuga. The opening menu features curries made from scratch — the basic one features 21 spices, and the sauce comes over rice with options such as chicken and pork katsu, sliced hard-boiled eggs and potato croquettes.

Curry Hyuga. 11 a.m.-11 p.m. Tuesday-Sunday. 1204 Broadway, Burlingame. 650-523-2230. https://curryhyuga.com.

The first Bay Area location of Tennessee chain Gus’s World Famous Fried Chicken is now open in downtown Oakland. The restaurant is starting off with a pared-down menu of Memphis-style fried chicken, Southern sides and slices of pie for takeout and delivery.

Gus’s Word Famous Fried Chicken. Noon-8 p.m. daily. 1430 Broadway, Oakland. Order via Doordash.

The chefs behind upscale Oakland restaurant Homestead have converted the space into the Humble Sandwich, a takeout-only sandwich spot inspired by East Coast delis. The menu offers classic, unfussy sandwiches made with Acme Bread, Molinari meats and other quality ingredients. The owners hope to continue the Humble Sandwich in some fashion post-pandemic.

The Humble Sandwich. 10 a.m.-6 p.m. Tuesday-Saturday. 4029 Piedmont Ave., Oakland. 510-420-6962 or www.instagram.com/HomesteadOakland/.

The group behind Saison and Angler opened a new barbecue concept called Saison Smokehouse for takeout and delivery. Operating out of Embarcadero restaurant Angler, Saison Smokehouse offers family-style meals for two ($72) or four ($135), with mains such as smoked chicken or pastrami brisket plus sides, biscuits, sauces and dessert.

Saison Smokehouse. 3-8 p.m. Tuesday-Saturday. 132 The Embarcadero, San Francisco. https://www.saisonsmokehouse.com.

March 30

Deliveries of clam chowder, oyster po’ boys and shrimp linguine are now available from Hog Island Oyster Co.’s new location in Larkspur’s Marin Country Mart. In addition to a short menu of prepared foods, Hog Island is offering oysters by the dozen, mussels and clams by the pound, large-batch cocktails and meal kits.

Hog Island Oyster Co. 11:30 a.m.-6 p.m. Wednesday-Sunday. 2401 Larkspur Landing Cir., Larkspur. Order at https://hogislandoysters.com.

Local Food Hall, a ghost kitchen with multiple locations in San Francisco, has expanded into Berkeley. Multiple restaurants operate delivery services out of the new location, including Dosa by Dosa, Amici’s New York Pizza and Park Gyros. Dosa by Dosa, which has a brick-and-mortar in Oakland, is serving rice bowls topped with spicy butter chicken, saag paneer or channa masala, among other options. Park Gyros offers falafel or kebab plates with hummus. And Amici’s will deliver a few different pizzas or wings.

Local Food Hall. 11 a.m.-11:30 p.m. daily. 1812 University Ave., Berkeley. Order via https://www.trycaviar.com/m/local-food-hall-berkeley-15764.

March 28

David Kinch, the chef-owner of Michelin-starred Manresa, opened Mentone in Aptos on Wednesday, according to the San Jose Mercury News. The restaurant is accepting pre-orders for pizzas, salads, wine and cocktails, with curbside pickup available.

Mentone. 4:30-8:30 p.m. Wednesday-Sunday. 174 Aptos Village Way, Aptos. Order via www.mentonerestaurant.com.

Pomella is open with California-Israeli food in Oakland, as first reported by Berkeleyside. Mica Talmor, who used to run Ba-Bite on Piedmont Avenue, is now serving mezze, hummus and entrees such as lamb kefta. Curbside pickup is available.

Pomella. 2-5 p.m. Thursday-Friday. 3770 Piedmont Ave., Unit B, Oakland. Order via https://www.pomellaoakland.com.

After an eight-month closure, San Francisco classic Tosca Cafe is back under new owners. The North Beach restaurant is now offering family-style Italian meals for $24 per person and bottles of wine for takeout — but you must pre-order online.

Tosca Cafe. 4-6:30 p.m. Thursday-Friday. 242 Columbus Ave., San Francisco. Order at https://www.exploretock.com/toscacafe/.

Esther Mobley contributed reporting.

A previous version of this story misstated Pomella’s current offerings.

Janelle Bitker is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: janelle.bitker@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @janellebitker