The first thing Stacy Allegro wants you to know: COVID-19 is definitely not just a really bad flu.

The Novato resident, 58, had a horrible fever for nine straight days — and that’s before she was admitted to the hospital, and the real physical punishment began.

“I’ve never felt that kind of ... I can’t even explain it,” Allegro said. “All systems shutting down basically. The pneumonia in my lungs was not good, the fever was still raging, they had IVs in both my arms. For the first two or three days I didn’t even know where I was.”

But as is the case for a lot of people right now, she seems to find catharsis in telling each agonizing detail of her tribulation, which leads to a very emotional ending. COVID-19 will devastate many lives. But through the pain, slow recovery and positive interactions with health providers who are barely visible underneath their personal protective equipment, Allegro’s story proves that human connection may be stronger than ever.

Allegro’s husband got a fever after returning from Morocco on March 10, and she started to feel sick on March 16. The CDC requirements for coronavirus testing were much more stringent at the time, and Allegro didn’t meet the specifications for a test to confirm what all were pretty certain was COVID-19.

Her fever and night sweats got worse, then started to rage past logical pain limits, going on for nine days, including one trip to Kaiser San Rafael to confirm she had pneumonia.

“I felt like a piñata, being punched at a 15-year-old’s birthday party,” Allegro said. “My ribs started hurting, every single bone in my body; the sheets were too heavy on my feet. It was just awful.”

Then her fever spiked to 103.7, and she called her primary care physician, who told her to rush to the emergency room. Arriving with the clothes on her back — a lucky pair of sweats that got her through a cancer scare — she sat down in a chair in the San Rafael Kaiser ER, and passed out.

“The next thing I remember I was in a glassed-in sort of a box with doctors and nurses and all kinds of PPEs,” Allegro said. “You don’t even know who they are, they’re so covered, they look like something out of a really horrible ‘Twilight Zone.’”

What she didn’t know at the time is that blood tests showed her liver and kidneys had perilous enzyme and creatinine levels — concerns that could lead to organ distress. She was isolated in a negative pressure room on the fourth floor, filled with equipment, and the fight of her life began.

“That was when the monsters came out from under the bed,” Allegro said. “I was absolutely terrified because I didn’t want to die without seeing my mom, my brother, my husband, my family, my dog. The nights felt like years.”

The first three days were a blur, and the most pain Allegro has experienced in her life. Which brings up the second thing Allegro wants you to know: Healthy people are getting this, and some are dying.

Allegro has been a pilates instructor for 25 years, also working as development director for the National Service Animals Monument, and was in very good health. At the time she was admitted, the average COVID-19 patient at the Kaiser facility was 52 years old.

“It’s happening to patients of all ages,” said Dr. Orna Hananel, Allegro’s Kaiser physician. “We’ve had young 20-year-old pregnant girls coming to the tent. We’ve had a 92-year-old lady coming to the tent.”

Before she contracted the illness, Allegro heard people minimizing the potential of the virus. Now she wishes everyone would limit their grocery trips, and err on the side of safety when following the rules. “It didn’t feel like any kind of flu I’ve ever had ... because of the crushing fever” she said. “Any other flu you take some aspirin, and maybe the fever might come back. I had a fever for 19 days. The pressure in my lungs and the cough — I was just laid out there. I was spent.”

But there was a point, even before her recovery started, when the acts of kindness began to pile up.

Some of the nurses were covered in personal protective equipment, barely identifiable, with helmets like astronauts. So Allegro decided to interview each of the nurses — to find out their names, whether they had families, why they got into nursing.

“And slowly but surely, these people, these sort of science fiction characters, became human,” Allegro said. “Because I knew who they were; I knew about their families … I couldn’t believe that they were coming in every day risking their lives to save mine. It was shocking to me.”

Allegro said Kaiser had departments she didn’t know existed, including one with a spiritual counselor. Others brought her new sweats and T-shirts, as she perspired through multiple garments every night. The catering department took a comfort-food request for meatloaf. As Allegro met each new nurse, social worker or food service employee, she wrote down their names.

Allegro calls Hananel “my angel.” The doctor called her several times a day, sometimes at 10 or 11 p.m., and sent her care packages with useful things like a nail clipper and toothpaste.

For safety reasons, Hananel couldn’t visit Allegro in person, even as she started improving halfway through the week. When Allegro discovered that the COVID-19 testing tent was just outside her window, she asked her doctor to step out and wave during her shift.

“She not only stepped out, but she brought everybody out, the nurses and the people that were in there,” Allegro said. “And they all started waving to me, giving thumbs up. It was really, really touching.”

Hananel offers a fond laugh when she remembers the conversations, including one where Allegro made a request for chocolate. “She was very humorous,” Hananel said. “We felt like she was in Alcatraz, and we were bootlegging everything that she needed.”

Allegro’s chart numbers were good enough, after a full week in the hospital, to talk about a discharge the next day. She still had a slight fever, and wasn’t allowed to give anything to the nurses. Any item the patient left in her room would have to be destroyed. She had a pen, and a few pieces of paper.

And that’s the last thing Allegro wants you to know: Even in the lowest moments, there is still so much good in the world.

“I took that paper, and I wrote a sign,” Allegro said. “I took the tape that they use for your IV to hold it down and I taped it all together. And I used some surgical gloves because I thought I sorely needed some decoration. They represent the purple heart, and the hands that helped me through this. And then I folded an origami bird, because I thought this means love and peace. And I just sort of stuck it all together and hung it on the wall.”

There’s a main note, with others written on paper hearts. The gloves and bird and a little sunlight add warmth to the cold hospital wall, which reads, in part:

“To everyone on the 4th floor,

“There are not enough words to express my love and gratitude for all of you! You are the bravest people I have ever met.”

“You made me feel like family at a time when my own family could not be with me. You chased away all the monsters, including the ones under my bed. I will never forget any of you. May you all be safe and watched over.

“Love & sincere gratitude,

“Stacy Allegro”

Allegro left Kaiser on April 3, to recover in her parents’ old home in Sonoma, with instructions to stay in isolation until she was two weeks asymptomatic.

The pneumonia wasn’t gone when she left Kaiser, and the night sweats continued, but the isolation was the hardest part. Her rescue dog Benson joined her a few days ago. Video conferences with Hananel have been one highlight of her days.

“I still every once in a while wake up with night terrors, thinking I’m still in the hospital,” Allegro said, as the end of her two-week isolation neared. “The nights still seem like weeks.”

Allegro took one drive through Santa Rosa, to pick up medication through a quickly unrolled car window. As she drove, Allegro said she was terrified to see people not wearing masks, not social distancing, not taking the virus seriously enough.

“I would be wrecked if I thought I gave this to any other human being on the planet,” she said. “I’m paralyzed. Even if my doctor called today and said, ‘Stacy, you’re good, you can wear your gloves and mask, you can go shopping.’ I wouldn’t do it.”

But Allegro says the disease has “put me closer to my feelings than ever before.” She’s telling her mother and other loved ones how much she loves them. She’s expressing gratitude.

“This whole thing,” she said, “has renewed my faith in the human spirit.”

Peter Hartlaub is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: phartlaub@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @PeterHartlaub