SACRAMENTO — Gov. Gavin Newsom ordered all Californians on Thursday to stay home and leave only for essential trips, escalating efforts to slow the spread of the coronavirus, which state officials estimate could infect more than half the population if drastic steps are not taken.

The order is similar to the shelter-in-place rules that Bay Area residents have been living under since Monday, allowing people to visit the grocery store, seek medical care, walk outside and exercise if they maintain social distance from others. It will force countless businesses in the state deemed nonessential to close their doors temporarily.

The order, the most far-reaching in the nation, took effect Thursday evening. Newsom said he did not know how long it will last, but that compliance is needed to “bend the curve” on the outbreak.

“It’s not my preferred choice. I know it’s not yours. But it’s a necessary one,” he said during an evening news conference. “This is not a permanent state. This is a moment in time.”

Although more than 23 million Californians are already living under stay-at-home orders in their cities and counties, Newsom said the “interdependence” of all communities in the vast state required tougher action.

“At the end of the day, we’re one body,” he said.

Newsom said he will rely for now on social pressure, rather than law enforcement, to maintain the order.

The Newsom administration is projecting that, without strong measures to thwart the disease’s spread, about 56% of Californians could be infected with the coronavirus in eight weeks. In a letter to President Trump on Wednesday requesting that a U.S. Navy hospital ship be ordered to the Port of Los Angeles through Sept. 1 to care for a potential overload of patients, Newsom said California has been “significantly impacted by the rapid increase in COVID-19 cases.”

“In some parts of our state, our case rate is doubling every four days,” he wrote.

In his news conference, Newsom said that “the numbers we put out today assume that we’re just along for the ride. We’re not. We want to manipulate those numbers down. That’s what this order is all about.”

Infectious disease experts said Thursday that the projected toll — which would add up to roughly 22 million people — is a worst-case scenario and, though possible, unlikely to actually become reality.

The projection was especially alarming given that there were slightly more than 1,000 confirmed cases in California as of Thursday night. But testing has been an ongoing problem, and the actual number of people infected is presumably much larger, though no one knows by how much.

All coronavirus projections — including, presumably, the one Newsom referred to — are based on incomplete and even faulty data, said Dr. John Swartzberg, a UC Berkeley infectious disease expert.

Newsom’s projection may come from a decent disease model, Swartzberg said, “but it’s based upon not a very strong foundation of data.”

Newsom said Thursday that his administration is moving aggressively to prevent a strain on the health care system and a potential shortage of 20,000 beds for patients. He announced that Seton Medical Center in Daly City will soon become one of the locations for treating coronavirus patients, and that the state is also working to lease motel rooms and dormitories at University of California and California State University campuses for additional space.

“Based upon our trendlines,” he said, “we felt it was appropriate to raise the ante.”

The state will cover the cost of reopening two previously empty floors at Seton and add about 80 beds, including critical care and intensive care beds, said Dr. Robert Perez, who oversees the physicians at the hospital. Seton has been operating with a number of empty beds recently as its owner, Verity Health System, has filed for bankruptcy protection.

The governor said he would rather be criticized for acting too aggressively than not going far enough.

“We will look back at these kinds of decisions as pivotal decisions,” he said.

San Francisco Chronicle staff writer Catherine Ho contributed to this report.

Alexei Koseff and Erin Allday are San Francisco Chronicle staff writers. Email: alexei.koseff@sfchronicle.com, eallday@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @akoseff @erinallday