Democrats are growing more confident about their chances of retaking power in Washington with 200 days to go before Election Day.

It’s an election that both sides now see as turning on the coronavirus pandemic and the American public’s views on how President Trump Donald John TrumpMnuchin says it was his idea to put Trump's name on stimulus checks Trump says he will use Defense Production Act to increase swabs for testing Trump's ex-deputy national security adviser denies being 'Anonymous' MORE steers the country through the worst public health crisis in modern memory.

Recent polls suggest a tight race, but also give Democrats hope that former Vice President Joe Biden Joe BidenKlobuchar to be next guest on Biden's podcast Former Inslee staffers pitch climate plan to Biden, Congress Trump says he'd be willing to give coronavirus aid to Iran MORE can top Trump in states such as Florida and Arizona that are crucial to his reelection chances.

ADVERTISEMENT

Democrats are also feeling upbeat about the Senate, where a handful of races will determine whether they can wrest away control of the chamber from Republicans.

Republicans, for their part, think the well-funded Trump campaign can help reelect the president to another four-year term, an outcome that would greatly increase the party’s chances of retaining the House majority.

And the GOP is hopeful a Trump win could provide the momentum needed to pick up 20 House seats and end Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiHouse prepares to vote on coronavirus aid package as soon as Wednesday Trump says Fox, Chris Wallace 'on a bad path' after Pelosi appearance on network Sunday shows - Talk turns to reopening, protests MORE’s (D-Calif.) second Speakership.

Here’s a look at the three battlegrounds.

White House

Biden has never seemed like an unbeatable candidate, to say the least.

ADVERTISEMENT

Polls show his supporters are not as enthusiastic as Trump’s, his gaffes are the stuff of legend and the progressive base of the Democratic Party was hoping other candidates would win the party’s primary.

Yet Democrats do have reason for optimism this week.

The party, desperate to end Trump’s presidency at one term, is uniting around the former vice president quickly.

Former President Obama, Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersSanders asks for donations to reelect members of 'The Squad' Klobuchar to be next guest on Biden's podcast Biden wins Wyoming Democratic caucus MORE (I-Vt.) and Sen. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth WarrenSanders asks for donations to reelect members of 'The Squad' Providing safe child care during COVID-19 — a life and death issue What Biden's VP choices bring — and don't bring — to the table MORE (D-Mass.) have all endorsed Biden this week, giving him an advantage over 2016 nominee Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonNorth Korea denies Kim Jong Un sent Trump a 'nice note' Republicans plow ahead with Russia origins probe The Memo: Culture war hits coronavirus crisis MORE, who didn’t see the party begin to unify around her candidacy until the summer.

Biden leads Trump in a number of national polls, as well as in the swing states of Arizona, Florida, Michigan, North Carolina, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, according to the RealClearPolitics polling average.

Trump has a big cash advantage at this stage of the race, along with the power of incumbency.

But for the president, the key is almost certainly the coronavirus crisis and the recession it has caused.

Trump was hoping he would ride a strong economy into reelection. Now he must convince voters that his stewardship is the best to steer the country back to economic success.

He’s signaled he wants to begin opening the economy as quickly as possible. He’s also noted that U.S. deaths from the coronavirus are far lower than some projections, which the White House argues is evidence of the success of his policies.

Trump’s argument, an echo in some ways of former President George W. Bush’s in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, is that it would be wrong to change the nation’s leader at this critical time.

The coronavirus crisis also promises to make the election campaign uglier.

Trump has signaled he’ll make Biden’s age and his son Hunter Biden’s business in Ukraine campaign issues. He’s ripped Democrats on personal terms for opposing decisions he’s made during the battle against the pandemic.

ADVERTISEMENT

Biden and Democrats, for their part, will argue fewer Americans would have died if Trump had taken quicker action.

Senate

Democrats must gain the White House and a net three seats to win back the Senate — an uphill climb that is not impossible.

In reality, Democrats probably need to take four Republican seats to win the Senate. Sen. Doug Jones (D-Ala.) is a huge underdog in a state Trump is likely to sweep to victory in November.

That means Democrats will probably have to defeat Sens. Martha McSally Martha Elizabeth McSallyDemocrats gain new momentum in fight for Senate majority Senate battle hinges on four races The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 MORE, Cory Gardner Cory Scott GardnerDemocrats gain new momentum in fight for Senate majority Senate battle hinges on four races The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 MORE and Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsDemocrats gain new momentum in fight for Senate majority Senate battle hinges on four races The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 MORE in Arizona, Colorado and Maine, respectively, and then win a fourth seat as well.

In all three of those contests, Democrats seem to have a decent chance of winning.

ADVERTISEMENT

Gardner is in the fight of his political life. Not only has Colorado turned bluer in recent years, he’s facing a potential challenge from former Gov. John Hickenlooper John HickenlooperDemocrats gain new momentum in fight for Senate majority Senate battle hinges on four races The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 MORE, the prohibitive front-runner in the state's Senate Democratic primary.

In Arizona, McSally is up against Democrat Mark Kelly, a retired astronaut who has shattered fundraising records since launching his Senate bid early last year. McSally lost her state’s last Senate race in 2018 before Gov. Doug Ducey (R) appointed her to fill the vacant seat of the late Sen. John McCain John Sidney McCainSenate battle hinges on four races Romney is only GOP senator not on new White House coronavirus task force Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day MORE (R-Ariz.).

Collins is also in a tough race in a state where Biden will be favored to take electoral votes in November.

The best chance for Democrats to pull out a fourth victory might be in North Carolina, where Democrats think GOP Sen. Thom Tillis Thomas (Thom) Roland TillisDemocrats gain new momentum in fight for Senate majority Senate battle hinges on four races Senate misses deadline, but talks on loans go on MORE (N.C.) is vulnerable.

If they can’t win there, they may look to Iowa, where Democratic outside groups are spending millions to oust Sen. Joni Ernst Joni Kay ErnstDemocrats gain new momentum in fight for Senate majority Senate battle hinges on four races Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (R).

Republicans hope they can take out Sen. Gary Peters Gary Charles PetersSenate battle hinges on four races Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day Michigan, Wisconsin Democratic senators endorse Biden MORE (D), who has a relatively low name ID. Trump pulled a surprise win in the state in 2016, giving the GOP hope he could do so again and that his coattails could help down the ticket.

ADVERTISEMENT

Democrats believe that they may be able to bring three other states into play: Kentucky, where Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellMitch McConnell should pull a John Roberts House prepares to vote on coronavirus aid package as soon as Wednesday Democrats gain new momentum in fight for Senate majority MORE (R) is facing a well-funded Democratic opponent in Amy McGrath; Texas, where Democrats are energized after a near-win against Sen. Ted Cruz Rafael (Ted) Edward CruzFormer US surgeon general on coronavirus: 'We were a bit late to recognize how bad this was' Coronavirus steals Trump economic edge Trump attacks Pelosi as 'political hack' over late-show appearance MORE (R) in 2018; and Georgia, where both of the state’s Republican senators, David Perdue and Kelly Loeffler Kelly LoefflerSenate battle hinges on four races Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day MORE, will face voters in November.

Each of those states will likely prove challenging for Democrats, and party operatives concede that while their chances there have improved, they’re still a reach.

House

The House is the least likely chamber to flip in the general election.

Republicans need a net gain of 20 seats to take back the majority. Republicans also have to take into account the redistricting in North Carolina, which will endanger two GOP-held seats, as well as retiring Rep. Will Hurd William Ballard HurdHow the GOP hopes to overcome steep odds in House battle The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day MORE’s (R-Texas) district, which Democrats are favored to take.

It would appear Republicans are well positioned with Democrats holding 30 seats in districts Trump carried in 2016, but not all of those races are competitive. The Cook Political Report rates Rep. Angie Craig’s (D-Minn.) district, which Trump won by 1.2 percentage points, as “lean Democratic.”

Meanwhile, Cook rates Reps. Mikie Sherrill Rebecca (Mikie) Michelle SherrillHow the GOP hopes to overcome steep odds in House battle The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day MORE's (D-N.J.) and Ron Kind Ronald (Ron) James KindHow the GOP hopes to overcome steep odds in House battle The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day MORE’s (D-Wis.) races as “likely Democratic.” Trump won Sherrill’s district by 1 point and Kind’s district by 4 points.

Having Biden as their presumptive presidential nominee could also play to House Democrats’ advantage in November. Vulnerable House Democrats, such as Rep. Joe Cunningham Joseph CunninghamHow the GOP hopes to overcome steep odds in House battle Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day Florida Republican becomes sixth member of Congress to test positive for coronavirus MORE in South Carolina’s 1st District, had voiced concerns about the prospect of Sanders, a self-described democratic socialist, at the top of the Democratic ticket.

However, Republicans do hold an advantage in a number of key districts. Cook changed the rating for the race to fill former Rep. Katie Hill Katherine (Katie) Lauren HillHow the GOP hopes to overcome steep odds in House battle Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day Democrats release Spanish-language attack ad for California special election MORE’s (D-Calif.) district from “lean Democratic” to “toss-up”; California Assemblywoman Christie Smith (D) and former Navy fighter pilot Mike Garcia (R) will face off in the vote-by-mail special general election there on May 12.

Rep. Abigail Spanberger Abigail Davis SpanbergerHow the GOP hopes to overcome steep odds in House battle The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day MORE’s (D-Va.) race in Virginia’s 7th District, which was also won by Trump in 2016, is considered a “toss-up” by Cook. The website also rates Rep. Lucy McBath Lucia (Lucy) Kay McBathHow the GOP hopes to overcome steep odds in House battle The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Ava DuVernay-produced documentary highlighting rising female politicians of color to air in June MORE’s (D-Ga.) seat in Georgia’s 6th District as a “toss-up.” That district was won by Trump in 2016 and was formerly held by former Rep. Karen Handel Karen Christine HandelHow the GOP hopes to overcome steep odds in House battle The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day MORE (R-Ga.), who is running again for the seat.

The coronavirus pandemic could have the biggest impact on the race. The crisis has forced candidates in all races to resort to virtual campaigning.

Republican candidates could see an enthusiasm and fundraising advantage with Trump at the top of the ticket. However, Democrats will likely be given another opportunity to run on health care, an issue with which they solidly won the House in 2018.