In March 2018, a regionally-known Virginia House of Delegates member from Culpeper, Virginia, went viral for delivering an impassioned defense of the Second Amendment on the General Assembly floor. The video came in wake of the tragic Parkland mass shooting in Parkland, FL. As of this writing, it boasts nearly 17M views on Facebook

It was this video that helped catapult Nick Freitas, a former Green Beret, to newfound political stardom.

Here in Virginia, many of us gotten to know Freitas and his family over the years. They are a familiar fixture at Republican events. Nick is undoubtedly seen as a rising star in the Republican Party of Virginia— a state party in desperate need of hopeful—and youthful— energy needed to rebuild the conservative movement here and stop Virginia’s transition into a blue state.

Delegate Freitas is a transplant to the Commonwealth of Virginia from Northern California, where he and his wife, Tina, his high school sweetheart, first met and married.

The Freitas family—together with their three children—firmly planted themselves in Culpeper in 2010, after he was honorably discharged from the Army in 2009.

In 2015, Freitas launched a first bid for the House of Delegates and won. He handily cruised re-election in 2017 and went on to win a historic write-in campaign last year after failing to make the ballot. In 2018, he challenged and narrowly lost to polarizing figure Corey Stewart, a former four-term at-large Chair of the Prince William County Board of Supervisors, in the Republican primary for U.S. Senate.

Last December, he announced his intention to run against Rep. Abigail Spanberger (D-VA) in Virginia’s 7th Congressional District. Prior to the announcement, there was great chatter among Republican activists and movement conservatives here that Freitas was eyeing a bid for U.S. Congress. Spanberger, a former CIA operations officer, rode the 2018 Blue Wave as a moderate Democrat and beat incumbent Congressman Dave Brat (R-VA) in a reliably red district. (While Spanberger won the seat in 2018, President Trump won the district in 2016.) Since coming to office, she’s shed this veneer and voted greatly in line with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi.

Critics of Freitas’ believe he’s an opportunist who’s set his sights on higher political aspirations. Supporters and those close to him, however, believe he is well-positioned to retake Virginia’s 7th Congressional District with his increased name ID, loyal grassroots army, and winning message.

Freitas is running against five other Republicans for the nomination who qualified for the convention. He originally had eight competitors. A nominee was supposed to be selected at a party convention on April 25th, but due to the coronavirus pandemic, the date is now uncertain.

The Resurgent recently caught up with Del. Freitas and asked him about the current status of his campaign. Here are his responses:

Introduce yourself to our readers

My name is Nick Freitas. I am a husband, father of three, Green Beret combat veteran, and for the past five years have served in the Virginia House of Delegates as a conservative Republican. Late last year I announced my candidacy to take back Virginia’s 7th District from Democrat Abigail Spanberger.



Prior to becoming a member of the Virginia House of Delegates, you were a Green Beret. How does that experience shape your policymaking abilities?



Green Berets specialize in unconventional warfare and counter insurgency. This provides relevant experience given the national security threats we face. In addition, Green Berets work “By, Through and With” the local population wherever we operate. So we spend a lot of time working with people that have diverse cultures, experiences and objectives in order to find common ground to achieve the mission.

What propelled you to run in VA-07 against Rep. Spanberger? How’s the race going, and explain the nomination process for non-Virginia residents, as it is not a primary.



The bottom line is that our country is in the midst of a national debate about the direction we want to go. We are either going to continue to fight for individual liberty, property rights, personal responsibility and free markets, or we are going to go the direction of greater government control and interference in our lives. Basically the path of Sanders, Pelosi and “the Squad.” Spanberger, despite her assurance that she would not be a secure vote for Nancy Pelosi, has voted with her 96% of the time. That does not represent the 7th District of Virginia.



Cook Political Report lists VA-07 as R+6 and the race is listed as a toss-up. The district was historically in Republican hands but flipped last election cycle. Why are you the best Republican candidate to take on Rep. Abigail Spanberger?



The short answer to that is the reason that the Cook Political Report gave for shifting this race from “Lean Democrat” to a “Toss Up” was my announcement that I would be entering the race. But the first question any candidate has to answer is where they stand on issues and principles. I have a record over the last 5 years in the Virginia General Assembly which demonstrates that I will vote and legislate exactly how I campaigned. I have A ratings from every conservative organization which tracks our votes. When I say I will stand on principle, I have proven that I will. In addition to that you have to have the resources to take on a top tier race that the entire country will be watching, That means fundraising, debates, social media networks and the ability to argue for conservative principles in a media environment that is often very hostile to us. We have the ability and the means to win in November.



What are your top issues on the campaign trail? What sets you apart from your Republican primary challengers? (Please elaborate as concisely as possible.)



Civil liberties (gun rights, life, etc.), the economy, healthcare are all leading issues. I think we have a lot of good Republicans in this race, but when it comes to combining the principles with the resources, our fundraising numbers, a social media presence that is twice the size of Spanberger’s, prominent endorsements, they all work to set us apart from the field. When the Cook Report moved this race from leans Democrat to toss up, they specifically mentioned our campaign as the reason.



Would you describe yourself as a conservative Republican? Which movement figures inspire your philosophical thinking? Who greatly inspired you to get proactive in conservative/Republican politics? What makes you inclined to the Republican Party?



I am definitely a conservative Republican. This is based in my faith which is the foundation of my worldview. The same God that created us, created us free, and government primary responsibility is to protect those natural rights, not to micromanage our lives. Bastiat, Sowell, Hayek, Reagan have all been incredibly influential in the development of my liberty based political philosophy. My mother was also a significant influence on me as the President of a Republican Women’s club when I was young. I have been working for our principles and our candidates since I was 15. I have been a Republican since I was 18. I believe that the Republican Party has strong roots in protecting liberty and my goal is to ensure that it remains committed to those principles.



Which notable organization and political figures have endorsed your campaign?



Senators Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, Mike Lee, Congressmen Dave Brat, Ben Cline, Dan Crenshaw and organizations like Club for Growth, Gun Owners of America, FreedomWorks and Citizens United have all endorsed our campaign as well as many state legislators and local officials and activists throughout the 7th district.



You just launched a podcast, Making the Argument with Nick Freitas, recently. What is your goal with that project? Do you hope more politicians, especially conservatives and Republicans, tap into this medium more to communicate their views?



I think podcasts are an excellent way to stay engaged with people and to provide information. Especially given the current crisis, it is important that elected officials stay connected. I have also found from traveling around the Commonwealth and the country and giving talks and training on effectively making the argument for conservative principles, that there is a real hunger for sound and relevant arguments in favor of individual liberty, economic freedom, etc. We wanted to use this medium as a way to provide people with the tools they need to effectively defend freedom against an onslaught of bad arguments coming from the media, pop culture and the left in general.

[Subscribe to ‘Making the Argument with Nick Freitas’ on Apple Podcasts.]



Could you talk about Virginia politically at-large and what your thoughts on the current status of the Republican Party of Virginia are? Is there any hope for the party to break its electoral dry spell [since 2013]? Are you optimistic about things, in wake of January’s impressive Lobby Day turnout and other efforts? Could candidates like you help restore some balance?



The Republican Party of Virginia has to get back to the basics of supporting local units and activists. Identifying and recruiting good candidates is a great place to start as well as providing some direction and resources from the top which will work to really build and empower local units. Conservatives by nature don’t believe in the centralization of power, and our party structure needs to understand and use that to our benefit. I am confident that we can see a resurgence of conservative policies in Virginia, but it will require education, organization and keeping people engaged beyond presidential elections. The huge rally we saw in Richmond was an example of grassroots spontaneity. That rally was not organized by a singular political entity, but by groups all over Virginia. It is critical that we provide these groups with the resources they need to ensure that we are cooperating, not competing against one another.



If you secure the GOP nomination and then go on to represent Virginians in Congress, what issues do you hope to draw more attention to?



On a philosophical level we need to once again effectively make the argument for individual liberty and free markets. From a policy perspective that means protecting all of our rights, especially ones currently under attack like our 2A rights. It also means revolutionizing the way DC does business. Policies like “One Issue Per Bill” are critical, reigning in the regulatory and administrative state, significant tax reform and fighting for greater educational freedom are all critical to our current fight and the success of this country for future generations.



Anything else you’d like our readers to know about your race and candidacy?

This is shaping up to be one of the most competitive races in the nation this November and from Day 1 we have been campaigning in that mindset. We’re excited and ready to keep up the fight through November and would ask anyone that is interested to go to www.nickforva.com to sign up to help us take back this crucial seat however they can. Also, subscribe and leave a 5-star review on our new podcast!



To learn more about Nick’s campaign, visit his website. Follow the campaign on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.