MSNBC host Rachel Maddow responded to a few rare words of praise from President Donald Trump Friday by pointing out several ways he's personally leading "the worst national response of any industrialized nation in the world."

Maddow recently interviewed the commanding general of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Lieutenant General Todd Semonite, regarding the hospital construction work they're doing on behalf of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Department of Health & Human Services (HHS) amid the coronavirus pandemic.

Trump thanked Maddow for "putting our military on full display," despite lashing out at the "Fake News" media in at least a half-dozen tweets between Friday and Saturday. The MSNBC host graciously accepted the president's compliment before launching into a series of posts labeling the Trump-led U.S. response as a "catastrophe" and listing bullet points detailing where the federal government must take immediate action. Maddow provided the president with a link to the full segment, which offered scathing criticism of Trump's "chaotic" coronavirus response: "By the way, did anyone show you the rest of the show from last night?"

Hi, Mr. President -- thanks for tweeting that interview. Gen. Semonite and the Army Corps are indeed doing great work, but at nowhere near the scale that is needed.



We're hundreds of thousands of hospital beds behind, months behind schedule, and... https://t.co/FdBAyDH49Y — Rachel Maddow MSNBC (@maddow) March 27, 2020

"Hi, Mr. President -- thanks for tweeting that interview. Gen. Semonite and the Army Corps are indeed doing great work, but at nowhere near the scale that is needed. We're hundreds of thousands of hospital beds behind, months behind schedule, and we're about to see the number of sick patients surge and hospitals overflow in multiple US sites at once," Maddow responded to Trump's Twitter commentary.

"This is not an NYC problem or even just a city problem. The apex patient surges will not happen tidily, one after the other, they'll flare up all over, overlapping," she continued. "I say this without any malice at all, but please know that the US response is a catastrophe that is on track to cost hundreds of thousands of lives. Stop talking about yourself and hyping unproven treatments and demanding people compliment you and all the rest of the nonsense."

Maddow went on to urge the president to nationalize supply chains for medical supplies and to remove Vice President Mike Pence and advisor Jared Kushner from the Coronavirus Task Force in favor of "actual, experienced pandemic response experts and scientists." She also implored the president to offer clear and direct orders to governors instead of "zig-zagging and dithering" remarks that have prolonged the virus spread.

The president had previously shared Maddow's interview with the U.S. Army Chief of Engineers Friday, saying: "Thank you to Rachel@Maddow for putting our Military on full display, and showing how GREAT a job the Federal Government is doing! Also, a special thanks to General Semonite, a Patriot of the highest order and a truly talented engineer and builder!"

But on Saturday morning, Trump returned to blasting the news media and sharing Fox News video clips of himself talking.

One of the reasons that Fake News has become so prevalent & far reaching is the fact that corrupt "journalists" base their stories on SOURCES that they make up in order to totally distort a narrative or story. When you see, "five sources say", don't believe the story, it is.... — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 28, 2020

"So much of the Lamestream Media is writing and broadcasting stories with facts that are made up and knowingly wrong. They are doing it by quoting unnamed sources that simply do not exist. These are very dangerous & corrupt people, who will do anything to win. NAME YOUR SOURCES!" the president tweeted Saturday in a series of posts accusing journalists and news publications of outright lying.

"Lamestream Media should be forced to reveal sources, very much as they did in the long ago past. If they did that, the media would be trusted again, and Fake News would largely be a thing if the past!" the president continued.