UPDATED: 10 a.m. EDT, Oct. 13 —

In the past six months, America has witnessed — or turned a blind eye to — multiple public executions of unarmed Black people as the troubling trend shows no signs of ending. The most recent instance came early Saturday morning when a police officer in Texas responded to a welfare check request for a Black woman resident by shooting into her window outside her home and killing her.

Here we go again. Atatiana Jefferson was just 28 years old and guilty of only being in her own home when a Fort Worth police officer shot and killed her early this morning. The cop, only identified as a white male, was not fired immediately. https://t.co/yvHr5rAcHQ — NewsOne (@newsone) October 12, 2019

Atatiana Jefferson, who was only guilty of living her life, was pronounced dead on the scene in her Fort Worth home in what appeared to be all but a repeat of the Amber Guyger shooting when the former Dallas police officer killed Botham Jean in his own home last year. And while Guyger was recently convicted of murder and sentenced to a very lenient 10 years in prison, it would appear that the Fort Worth cop — a white male who was enjoying the privilege of remaining anonymous — was not paying any attention to the murder trial in Dallas.

In each of those cases, the victim was shot within seconds.

In other words, police killing innocent people in their own homes is seemingly becoming the rule and not an exception to it.

Those two police shootings bore similar hallmarks to another one in Texas that took place in May when Pamela Turner, a grandmother, was shot five times at very close range in an apartment complex parking lot in suburban Houston. She, too, was shot in seconds after screaming out, “I’m pregnant!”

Pamela Turner has been identified as the 44-year-old grandmother of 3 who police killed in Baytown, Texas on Monday night. #PamelaTurner https://t.co/m5K2GlN7PO — NewsOne (@newsone) May 14, 2019

The Baytown Police Department responded in kind by seeming to blame Turner for her own death, alleging she was grabbing the officer’s Taser, which, even if true, should obviously not have called for lethal force to be used by someone who has, in theory, been trained to de-escalate such situations without using a gun.

Earlier that day, the NYPD officer who used an illegal and banned chokehold to kill Eric Garner in a death recorded on video was finally beginning his administrative trial to determine if he should be fired. It took place nearly five years after Daniel Pantaleo killed Garner. Despite video evidence, a grand jury declined to indict Pantaleo, who has enjoyed job security as well as a significant salary raise since he killed Garner. The NYPD also recently determined Garner did not die from being choked, although the entire world saw the video of Pantaleo choking Garner.

Rewind just six days earlier and a white woman in Georgia who witnessed a driver commit a hit and run decided to chase the culprit, block him with her own car and shoot him to death. Kenneth Herring was 62 when he was executed by Hannah Payne, a 21-year-old vigilante who was ultimately charged with murder. According to her lawyer, she was simply trying to be a good Samaritan by following and confronting Herring about something the Clayton County Police Department described as a minor fender bender.

Good Samaritan or BBQ Becky 2.0? Hannah Payne is accused of chasing down Kenneth Herring, blocking his car with her car and shooting him to death in Clayton County, Georgia.https://t.co/rg7XeQ1CeO — NewsOne (@newsone) May 9, 2019

While those two examples were not related, they were linked to what seems to be an increasingly brazen attitude of superiority by non-Black people toward Black folks. Perhaps even more troubling was how even when charged with a crime, many of the accused folks who appeared to take the law into their own hands end up being found not guilty.

That was also true this past week again when it was revealed that law enforcement had concealed critical evidence surrounding two major deaths in police custody. A report from the 2009 Oscar Grant police shooting was released last weekend and showed that the officer involved lied about the series of events that led to the killing. It was also revealed last week that cell phone footage filmed by Sandra Bland during her violent arrest in 2015 for a simple traffic violation contradicted that officer’s claims that he feared for his life.

In other words, the people who are killing or contributing to the deaths of Black people are seemingly emboldened by the good chance they won’t have to pay for their deadly actions.

That was true in Pittsburgh earlier this year, when former officer Michael Rosfeld was acquitted for shooting 13-year-old Antwon Rose in the back. Video footage showed Rosefeld shooting as Rose fled, showing the officer was not facing any imminent threat of danger when he discharged his service weapon. Still, a jury agreed that he feared for his life.

On June 19, Pittsburgh Police Officer Michael Rosfeld shot and killed 17-year-old Antwon Rose. #AntwonRose https://t.co/DFQwySE355 — NewsOne (@newsone) March 23, 2019

But in Minneapolis, where former officer Mohamed Noor, a Black Somali American, was recently found guilty for killing a white woman in a similar manner, those same rules that Rosefeld enjoyed were not applied.

Mohamed Noor, who killed an unarmed Australian woman named Justine Damond, was found guilty of third degree murder and second degree manslaughter. https://t.co/Qskt3WjqKI — NewsOne (@newsone) May 1, 2019

Meanwhile, the public executions of Black people keep happening. We’ve seen it in Charlotte as well as in Louisiana, with both happening in April. We saw it in Dallas this past September. The list of fatal police shootings of Black people, most of the time unarmed, continues to grow without any indication that would ease up anytime soon.

The trend isn’t a coincidence, either, according to a report from the Washington Post last year.

‘[U]nlike President Barack Obama, Trump isn’t interested in police reform. The Obama administration oversaw a significant reduction in federal incarceration, scaled back federal drug prosecutions and went further than any other modern White House in its efforts to reform local police departments,” Wesley Lowery wrote at the time. “Trump, by contrast, has encouraged officers to rough up ‘thugs’ they take into custody, telling an audience of officers [in 2017], ‘Don’t be too nice.’”

If this past week was any indication, it would appear that police and citizens alike have heeded the president’s calls, and then some.

SEE ALSO:

What’s Happening In Cleveland? String Of Inmates Dying Causes Fear

Are Valedictorian Honors About Merit Or Race And Class?