Jefferson County, Colo., officials are looking for an 18-year-old who is considered “infatuated with [the] Columbine school shooting” and “armed and extremely dangerous," in relation to the " credible threat" made against Columbine High School and other Denver-area schools on Tuesday.

Authorities have identified Sol Pais, 18, as a suspect in its ongoing investigation. She is described as a white woman, about 5-foot-5 with brown hair. Jefferson County police say that Sol was last seen within county limits wearing a black T-shirt, camouflage-print pants, and black boots. Law enforcement officials confirmed that her presence in the area, given her background regarding her obsession with the Columbine shooting, was the motive behind calling the schools' lockdown.

“Last night, Sol Pais traveled to Colorado and made threats in the Denver metropolitan area,” Jefferson County sheriff’s officials wrote on Facebook. “She is armed and considered to be extremely dangerous.”



The @FBIDenver & JCSO are asking for the public’s help regarding a potential credible threat. Last night Sol Pais traveled to Colorado & made threats. She is armed & considered to be extremely dangerous 1/3 pic.twitter.com/2x5iwddsMp — Jeffco Sheriff (@jeffcosheriffco) April 16, 2019



"Please call the FBI tipline at (303) 630-6227 where your call will be answered immediately if you have seen this individual or have information on her whereabouts. Please do not approach her as she is considered armed and dangerous."

Mike Taplin, a spokesman for the Jefferson County Sheriff's Office, said the office is working alongside federal authorities, including the FBI, in investigating the threat. More than a dozen schools, including Columbine High School, have heightened their security and are under lockdown. Taplin, however, did not give any additional information regarding the threat.

The threats come four days short of the 20th anniversary of the Columbine High School shooting, when two of the school's students, Dylan Klebold, 17, and Eric Harris, 18, killed 12 students and one teacher. The pair had also planted around the campus small homemade bombs, which did not explode. Law enforcement officials have not publicly made any connection between the threats and the anniversary of the shooting.