As Joe Biden eyes a 2020 presidential run, he’s apparently laying the groundwork for a ticket with Stacey Abrams, one of the rising stars in the Democratic Party’s constellation.

Abrams, who fell short last year in her historic race for Georgia governor, met privately with the former vice president on Thursday in Washington—at Biden’s request—the Associated Press reported.

It was unclear exactly what they discussed, but after two successful campaigns with President Barack Obama, Biden tapping Abrams as his running mate could serve as a source of excitement for and ignite interest among Black women, who have emerged as a powerful voting bloc.

See Also: With Abrams, Democrats Look For Black Women To Save Them, Again

In addition to helping to turn out the Black vote, Abrams, 45, could appeal to younger voters. At 76, Biden tends to draw support from older, working-class white voters—many of whom defected to Trump in 2016. Abrams, a progressive Democrat, could possibly also bring folks on the far left to the team.

People are calling on Stacey Abrams to hit a home run in her response to Trump's State of the Union address…https://t.co/msJMJvWWgw #SOTU #StateOfTheUnion #StaceyAbrams pic.twitter.com/DGYJ6Eceov — NewsOne (@newsone) February 5, 2019

All of that said, Abrams has multiple options in her political career.

Although lost the governorship in a contest that was plagued with voter suppression targeting African-Americans, her future has perhaps never looked brighter.

In January, Democratic Party leaders picked her to deliver their response to Trump’s State of the Union address.

There was also the possibility of Abrams running for president in 2020, which she said Monday was “definitely on the table.” If Abrams enters the race, she would all but be a favorite among Black women who are ready to leverage their political strength.

Democrats have called Black women the backbone of the party and have relied on them before to help save the party. Democratic National Committee Chairman Tom Perez has sung the praises of Black women as an important voting bloc in the party.

“Let me be clear: We won in Alabama and Virginia because Black women led us to victory. Black women are the backbone of the Democratic Party, and we can’t take that for granted. Period,” Perez told The Washington Post in 2017 after big election wins in those two states.

Abrams also has not ruled out a Senate run in 2020. She told the AP that she was sticking to her previous commitment to announce her Senate plans in early April.

“The Senate is a different way to tackle the issues I see. It is a continuation of my legislative work, which I appreciated, but it’s an indirect solution to some of the challenges I see,” Abrams said.

SEE ALSO:

Here’s How Much Joe Biden Was Paid For A Speech That Reportedly Helped Republican Who Opposed Obamacare

What’s Next For Stacey Abrams And Andrew Gillum? Fallen Candidates Hint At Political Futures