The Bay Area is still in the cold and flu season and now the coronavirus is circulating too, which is leaving many people with coughs and fevers wondering what may be causing their illness — and what they should do about it.

The short answers: It’s probably not the coronavirus, but it could be. And as for what to do: Stay home.

Yes, everyone is staying home right now, but people with any symptoms should be especially cautious. Don’t go grocery shopping, don’t run down the street for milk, don’t duck out to fill the gas tank. Also, as much as possible, people who aren’t feeling well should keep their distance from everyone else in their household, even if that means someone has to sleep on the couch.

Symptoms of COVID-19 — the illness caused by the new coronavirus — can be difficult if not impossible to distinguish from influenza, or even a really bad cold or allergies.

The main symptoms are fever and cough, and shortness of breath as the illness progresses. People with COVID-19 tend to not have the upper respiratory complaints — such as runny nose and sinus congestion — or gastrointestinal issues that often come along with influenza. That said, there have been cases of COVID-19 where patients had all of those symptoms.

It’s hard for even experts to diagnose someone by an absence of symptoms. And testing kits to confirm a COVID-19 diagnosis are in short supply. That means most people who are sick right now have no way of knowing for sure what’s wrong with them.

The good news is that for the vast majority of people, it doesn’t matter. There is no specific treatment for coronavirus infection. So the advice is going to be the same no matter the source of infection: rest, drink fluids, take a fever suppressant as needed and stay away from others.

People who are sick should stay as isolated as possible until they’ve had no fever for at least three days, their other symptoms — including cough — have improved, and it’s been at least seven days since they started feeling ill, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Older people and those with underlying health problems will want to check in with their doctors at the onset of symptoms and watch carefully for complications since they are at higher risk of serious illness. If they end up hospitalized, they may get tested for the coronavirus.

Also, anyone who has recently traveled overseas, especially to areas with known coronavirus outbreaks, or who has been in contact with someone diagnosed with the virus should immediately contact a health care provider if they have symptoms.

Health care workers — and in particular people who work in long-term-care facilities with older, fragile patients — should stay home as soon as they start feeling unwell and not return to work until all of their symptoms have subsided and they’re given the OK to come back, public health officials say.

This group of workers may be able to get tested for the coronavirus depending on where they live and the availability of tests in their area. They should ask their doctor about testing, which will help them know when they can safely return to work. Also, if they test positive then others in the health care setting, including patients, may also need to be screened for infection.

Everyone in the Bay Area is advised to practice rigorous social distancing for now. But not everyone can work from home, and some people can’t afford to miss any more work than absolutely necessary. People who fall ill and must return to work should follow the CDC advice on when it’s safe to go back. Once they do return, they still should avoid touching others or standing or sitting too close, and wash their hands frequently.

Erin Allday is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: eallday@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @erinallday