A number of House Republicans are warning Saudi Arabia to ease oil production as a trade war between the kingdom and Russia has flooded markets and depressed oil prices.

Lawmakers, led by House Minority Whip Steve Scalise Stephen (Steve) Joseph ScaliseThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Republicans go on attack as loans for small businesses start to run out MORE (R-La.), said they were concerned “with the Kingdom’s actions to artificially distort global crude oil markets as countries around the world struggle to address a growing economic and health crisis fueled by the COVID-19 novel coronavirus pandemic."

The letter to Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman comes as the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) prepares to meet Thursday to discuss production levels.

ADVERTISEMENT

Oil prices in March hit the lowest level in 18 years, with prices now hovering in the mid-$20 range after remaining around $55 in February.

While coronavirus has limited people’s ability to travel, the global market has been overwhelmed with supply — harming U.S oil producers who must rely on the more expensive fracking process to produce oil.

“As a result of the Kingdom’s March decision to artificially depress global crude prices, thousands of American workers employed directly by our country’s oil and gas producers, as well as thousands more employed in related industries, face increased financial and economic uncertainty. While other global actors use oil and gas markets as political leverage, the Kingdom must be a model of leadership,” lawmakers said.

President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE has floated that both Russia and Saudi Arabia may be willing to reduce production by 15 million barrels.

But those comments have been followed by threats to possibly impose tariffs on foreign fuel sources — a concerning idea to many in the oil industry — or imposing production cuts on U.S. producers.

ADVERTISEMENT

House Republicans alluded to the potential for consequences amid slumped oil prices.

“Failure to address this energy crisis will jeopardize the joint efforts between our nations to collaborate economically and militarily,” they wrote. “If the Kingdom fails to act fairly to reverse this manufactured energy crisis, we would encourage any reciprocal responses that the U.S. government deems appropriate.”

The Saudi Arabian Embassy in Washington did not immediately respond to request for comment.

Lawmakers in the Senate last month urged Saudi Arabia to leave OPEC, channeling the message through Secretary of State Mike Pompeo Michael (Mike) Richard PompeoBeijing's coronavirus blunder empowers anti-China hawks Overnight Defense: Army Corps turning DC convention center into hospital | Veterans will automatically get stimulus checks | Pompeo talks arms control with Russia What analysts are missing about Trump's Africa policy MORE.

“The Organization of Petroleum-Exporting Countries is a relic of a cartelized past, one that burdens the Kingdom with free-riders and forces it to shoulder the lion’s share of every production decision,” lawmakers wrote in a letter signed by Sens. Lisa Murkowski Lisa Ann MurkowskiOvernight Energy: EPA weakens power plant pollution rule | DOJ lets companies skip paying penalties during pandemic | Trump eyes plan to pay companies to keep crude in the ground Trump administration eyes paying oil companies to keep crude in the ground: reports Overnight Energy: Democrats say stimulus should not bail out fossil fuel industry | Court rules for scientists barred from EPA boards | New setback for Keystone XL pipeline MORE (R-Alaska), Kevin Cramer Kevin John CramerThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening GOP senators target WHO as part of coronavirus probe Tentative deal would slash global oil production by 10 percent MORE (R-N.D.), Dan Sullivan Daniel Scott SullivanOvernight Health Care: Trump fires back at critics during briefing | Trump claims he has authority on when to reopen states | Governors form groups to discuss plans | Fauci offers support to Trump | House delays return Senate punts stalled coronavirus aid to Thursday House Republicans threaten pushback on Saudi Arabia amid oil market slump MORE (R-Alaska), James Inhofe James (Jim) Mountain InhofeNew ad targets McConnell's 'culture of corruption' amid coronavirus pandemic Kudlow slams senators who allegedly traded stock before pandemic House Republicans threaten pushback on Saudi Arabia amid oil market slump MORE (R-Okla.), John Hoeven John Henry HoevenHouse Republicans threaten pushback on Saudi Arabia amid oil market slump Overnight Energy: Trump rollback of Obama mileage standards faces court challenges | Court strikes down EPA suspension of Obama greenhouse gas rule | Trump floats cutting domestic oil production Lawmakers announce legislation to fund government purchases of oil MORE (R-N.D.) and Cindy Hyde-Smith (R-Miss.).

Updated at 4:32 p.m.