Whether it’s a month from now or two or three, when the Bay Area finally emerges from its long collective isolation, the world everyone re-enters may look dramatically different from the one left behind.

It seems likely now that the regional epidemic will be mostly resolved sometime in May or June, but the coronavirus threat won’t have fully passed. Public health officials will mount a massive defense to contain potential flare-ups — sparks of individual cases that could reignite another outbreak.

For the public at large, even as people are allowed back to work and school and encouraged to take the first steps back into a functional society, they’ll be advised to keep their distance and protect themselves and others from infection.

Wearing face coverings in public spaces may become common. People may still be told to work from home as much as possible. Public transit may need to be completely re-imagined to prevent overcrowding.

The Giants might play to an empty Oracle Park, and the A’s in the Coliseum with no fans, or the teams could not play at all.

“I suspect we’ll still be 6 feet apart for a long time. I don’t know that Major League Baseball is coming back,” said Warner Greene, a senior investigator studying the coronavirus at the Gladstone Institutes. “We took for granted so much that this virus has taken away from us.”

The Bay Area and the rest of California currently are focused on slowing down and eventually halting altogether an outbreak that has infected more than 12,000 people statewide. The entire state has been sheltering in place since March 19, and most of the Bay Area a few days longer than that.

The stay-home orders will last until at least May 3, and may extend beyond that. The point is to keep people from interacting as much as possible and prevent the disease from infecting so many at once that hospitals are overwhelmed. That’s what is happening in New York, which was slower than California to order aggressive social distancing.

But already many public health experts are thinking beyond May or even June, when California’s outbreak presumably will be waning or possibly gone altogether. Case counts are continuing to climb — about 10% to 15% a day across the state, and somewhat less so in the Bay Area — but eventually they will plateau.

What authorities want to see is no new cases at all. Once a couple of weeks have passed that way, it may be safe to start letting people go back to their lives. But re-entry will be slow and complicated.

At first, people will be allowed to return to work, but still told to keep 6 feet apart when at all possible. Large gatherings — concerts and theater productions, sporting events and public meetings — will be discouraged, maybe for many more months.

Meanwhile, public health officials must be able to quickly identify and isolate new infections to prevent them from spreading. That means widespread testing — something that’s not possible yet — and aggressive investigation of every case to track down who else may be infected. Counties will need armies of trained workers to do those labor-intensive jobs.

“What’s going to happen is someone will make a judgment, or the health officers and the state will collectively make a judgment, that it’s time to ease out of social restrictions. And you need a plan in place,” said George Rutherford, a UCSF infectious disease expert who has been advising state and local public health officials.

Widespread sheltering in place is unprecedented, Rutherford noted. So too is the return to normal life, whatever that will look like. “The playbook isn’t that deep,” he said.

Back to work — and transit: Most likely not everyone will return to work, or school, all at once, public health experts said. Ideally those who can comfortably work from home will continue to do that.

When those who work in offices or public spaces return to their jobs, employers should make it easy for people to keep their distance. That may mean asking them to work in shifts or expanding work spaces so that desks can be moved farther apart. Water cooler gossip may be banned altogether.

One potential complication will be public transit. Crowding on BART trains and Muni buses will need to be prevented, somehow, infectious disease experts said. That may require more trains and buses from systems that currently are losing millions of dollars a month because of the huge drops in ridership. The trains and buses themselves may need to be redesigned to promote more social distancing.

“Public transportation — that’s an important issue if you say everyone can return to work,” said Jay Levy, an infectious disease expert at UCSF. “I would hope there’s someone with a really good solution to that, because I can’t think of it.”

Schools in California won’t be reopening this academic year, but public health officials need to be thinking now about summer camps and other places where children might cluster once their parents return to work. It’s likely that small gatherings will be encouraged, infectious disease experts said, and that the same children will be told to stick together so there isn’t cross-socialization that could make outbreaks harder to contain.

Learning how to socialize again: It may be many more months before large gatherings will be allowed again, since those events make it much easier for one or two infections to blossom into another outbreak, public heath experts said.

That could mean no fans for baseball games in the fall, and no live concerts at all for a long time to come. At some point those venues may reopen, but to much smaller crowds that allow for people to sit or stand far apart.

Smaller get-togethers will be OK, and restaurants, coffee shops, bars and clubs probably will reopen around the same time people are allowed back to work. But counties are likely to require them to limit capacity.

The last places to reopen to the public may be the most vulnerable: hospitals and nursing homes. Visitors have been forbidden from those places because outbreaks can be especially devastating. On Friday, public health officials in Contra Costa County announced that 27 patients in a 47-bed facility in Orinda had tested positive for the virus. Laguna Honda nursing home in San Francisco has reported 13 cases among patients and staff.

Public health officials will want to make sure the outbreak is fully extinguished and the threat to those patients is extremely low before allowing visitors, infectious disease experts said.

“We will start to pull back in layers and phases some of these interventions on physical distancing,” said Cyrus Shahpar, a Bay Area epidemiologist and former head of global rapid response for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Visitors to nursing homes will be one of the last things we do, in comparison to opening schools.”

New infections: The most important part of resuming normal life will probably be the most challenging — testing and isolating new infections, quickly and aggressively.

There will undoubtedly be new cases even after the current outbreak is over, most likely due to travelers arriving from other countries or even other states where the virus is still widespread. As long as public health officials have the resources, which includes easy access to rapid-diagnostic tests, they should be able to find those individuals and isolate them before they “re-seed” the Bay Area, said Rutherford.

But tests are still in short supply, in California more than most other states. The hope is that testing becomes much more accessible in the next month or two while the state’s stay-home order remains in effect.

Another shortfall is in public health staff experienced in the investigative work required to trace every person an infected individual has come into contact with. Contact tracing is critical to prevent clusters of disease that can quickly become full-blown outbreaks.

Some public health experts have suggested that counties start hiring out-of-work people now and train them to do contact tracing. That would ease unemployment, plus help build the staff that may be needed in the fall to combat a resurgence of the coronravirus.

“What about this $2 trillion they just released?” said Lee Riley, a UC Berkeley infectious disease expert, referring to the coronavirus relief package approved by Congress last week. Some of that money, he said, could be applied toward training and bulking up the public health departments.

The new reality of post-sheltering life may be in place for a year or longer, until a vaccine is developed. It’s possible the United States will get a reprieve over the summer if the coronavirus turns out to be seasonal, as some scientists believe. But even if it goes away for a while, it’s likely to resurface in the fall, and the country will still be vulnerable.

Some of the changes may even be permanent, said Greene with the Gladstone Institutes. He noted that this coronavirus is the third of its viral family to cause a global health crisis in the past 18 years. Once this one is under control, the world will have to prepare for the next.

“I think it will take a while for us to come out of this. It’s not just a matter of we’re back to normal in two more months,” Greene said. “This country is resilient. But this is going to test our resilience.”

San Francisco Chronicle staff writer Catherine Ho contributed to this report.

Erin Allday is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: eallday@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @erinallday