CLOSE About 6.5 million pounds of beef is being recalled by Arizona-based meat producer JBS Tolleson, INC. Veuer's Natasha Abellard has the story.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture complained of 'egregious' livestock practices. The company disputes that.

A logo sign outside of a facility occupied by JBS USA in Tolleson on Feb. 4, 2018. (Photo: Kristoffer Tripplaar/Sipa USA via AP)

More than 6.5 million pounds of raw beef products were voluntarily recalled Thursday from a decades-old plant in Tolleson where federal officials had previously complained about "egregious" and "inhumane" livestock conditions.

The Tolleson facility is operated by Brazilian company JBS S/A's U.S. subsidiary, JBS USA. Officials said the meat may be contaminated with Salmonella Newport, a strain of the bacteria that is a common cause of food poisoning.

The recall announcement came more than a year after the U.S. Department of Agriculture sent an enforcement notice to the company's president and months after one of the company's plants in North Carolina recalled 35,000 pounds of raw ground beef.

JBS also is the majority owner of the Pilgrim's Pride line, which in February recalled more than 101,000 pounds of breaded chicken due to possible foreign-matter contamination.

MORE: Processor recalls 6.5 million pounds of beef after salmonella contamination

"Yesterday, out of an abundance of caution, JBS USA initiated a voluntary recall of ground beef products from our Tolleson, Ariz., beef production facility due to the potential presence of Salmonella," JBS USA spokeswoman Misty Barnes wrote in an email. "Our priority at all times is consumer safety. We are working in close partnership with USDA to make sure all potentially impacted product is removed from stores and homes."

Barnes could not be reached by phone and did not respond to emailed questions.

Bill Marler, a Seattle lawyer nationally recognized for his work in food safety, said he hasn't seen a recall this size in years.

"I've been doing this for 25 years," he said. "I can't recall off the top of my head when the last multimillion-pound recall was, but it's been a while."

The company, near 91st Avenue and Buckeye Road, employs 1,650 people and is Tolleson's largest employer, according to the city's annual financial report.

Feds complain of 'egregious' practices

JBS pays livestock producers for livestock sent to the Tolleson facility, according to the company's website. A July 2017 notice from the USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service accused the facility's president of enabling "egregious" and "inhumane" practices with livestock.

Officials found two "mentally incoherent" cows laying on their sides and "moaning as if in pain." The inspector asked for the cows to be euthanized — one died in its pen before it could be put down, according to the notice.

Documents show JBS Tolleson took issue with the original federal notice and wrote "we feel that we were operating in a humane fashion."

The USDA inspectors deferred action and gave JBS Tolleson a chance to implement a proposed action plan, according to an October 2017 agency document.

CLOSE Most people take precautions to avoid contracting salmonella poisoning from raw chicken, but there are other foods that are surprisingly more likely to harbor the harmful bacteria. Leafy green vegetables such as lettuce, kale, and spinach are actually the biggest carriers of salmonella. According to the FDA, eggs, even clean, uncracked ones, can contain salmonella with "79,000 cases of foodborne illness and 30 deaths each year caused by eating eggs contaminated with Salmonella." Sprouts, melons, and raw milk are other foods that commonly carry the bacteria as well.

When to recall

Finding salmonella in meat doesn't always mean a recall is on the way.

"Salmonella, weirdly enough, is not considered an adulterant (in ground beef, red meat or poultry), even though it sickens 1.3 million Americans every year," Marler said.

Eating food contaminated with salmonella can cause salmanellosis. Symptoms include diarrhea, abdominal cramps and a fever within 12 to 72 hours of consuming the food, though most people recover without treatment in four to seven days.

"It's completely OK to test for it, find it and continue to sell it anyway," Marler said. "There are times when illnesses start stacking up ... (the USDA) will ask a company to do a recall, but this is not a forced recall."

All recalls are voluntary, a USDA spokeswoman confirmed.

While ground beef, red meat and poultry fall under the USDA's authority, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration oversees the inspection of other foods and does consider salmonella an adulterant when it's found in fish, cereal, produce and other products it governs. The FDA does enforce mandatory recalls, Marler said.

Culture of Salmonella bacteria. 3D illustration. (Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto)

What to look for in recalled beef

The Tolleson facility is one of several meat-processing plants across the U.S. owned by Brazilian parent JBS S/A and its JBS USA subsidiary.

The Tolleson facility, in operation for about 45 years, processes meat under various brands including 5 Star Beef, Cedar River Farms, Showcase, La Herencia, Four Star, Clear River and thinkpure.

The beef subject to the recall was shipped to retailers and institutions nationwide and bears the marking "EST. 267" inside the USDA mark of inspection.

The recall came after a USDA investigation found that 57 people from 16 states fell ill between Aug. 5 and Sept. 6 and identified JBS as the common supplier, according to the agency.

Some of the recalled beef from the Tolleson business may be frozen and already in consumers' freezers, the FSIS warned. They were packaged from July 26 to Sept. 7. Consumers who bought these products should not eat them. The products should be thrown away or returned to the place of purchase.

Reach reporter Joshua Bowling at jbowling@azcentral.com or 602-444-8138. Follow him on Twitter @MrJoshuaBowling.

READ MORE:

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/southwest-valley/2018/10/04/tolleson-arizona-plant-recalled-beef-had-egregious-practices-feds-say/1522863002/