SALT LAKE CITY — Nothing is normal right now.

While America is moving toward easing its restrictions in the coming weeks, there's still a lot of uncertainty surrounding the coronavirus pandemic. But these extraordinary times have inspired extraordinary acts of kindness from Utahns everywhere, often benefiting total strangers.

It's all part of Utah's long legacy of helping our neighbors in need.

KSL.com’s new Uplifting Utah column showcases the good done by those around you. If you have a feel-good, local story, we’d love to hear about it! Email us the social media post or a description of the story in 200 words or less to web@ksl.com with the subject line “Uplifting Utah” and we'll pick some to share.

Here are four uplifting stories that will brighten your day:

Write By Your Side

"I am part of a volunteer project here in Utah that is trying to make a difference for good during this difficult time. We have started a project called Write By Your Side, in which we ask volunteers to write letters to residents of assisted living centers on lockdown. Because some of these facilities are unable to accept mail, we have been emailing the letters in to the facilities and they are printed onsite, then delivered to residents. So there is no possibility of sending unwanted germs into the facility.

We have delivered letters to ten facilities in Utah and one in Oregon so far, and the feedback we are getting is very positive! The letters coming in are full of encouragement and kindness. Even small children are drawing pictures to send in to the elderly residents."

— Tristan Tolman

More information about the project is available here.

Helping a stranger

"While my daughter-in-law was ready to check out, there was a young couple with several young children checking out as well. They had two bottles of milk. The dad scanned the first bottle of milk, when the second bottle would not scan he told the attendant. The attendant said, 'Sorry, you can only buy one.' My daughter-in-law asked if she could buy his extra milk. The cashier said yes. She bought it and gave it to them. The mother had tears in her eyes. Proud of my daughter-in-law. Small things make a big difference in a time of stress."

— Barbara Wright

Trucker To-Go Bags

"When our family vacation was canceled for spring break due to coronavirus we decided to do a family spring break service project instead.

"After hearing some of my driver’s stories while out on the road (I dispatch trucks) the kids chose to put our extra time into helping those who are keeping our country rolling. With the help of family, friends and neighbors we were able to collect donations to put together what my kids call 'Trucker-To-Go Bags.'

"The bags contain some of the needed items truckers are having a hard time finding out on the road. Toilet paper, sanitizer and a face mask are just a few of the things in the bag along with water, snacks, treats and a note of appreciation. The kids collected donations for the past two weeks, and then spent spring break putting the kits together. They were able to complete 100 'to-go' bags. We delivered half of them to the Love's & Flying J in Springville on Good Friday, distributing them to truckers passing through Utah over the holiday weekend. We will deliver the other half next weekend.

"It was amazing to see everyone come together to help out complete strangers who are continuing to work and drive to keep our country rolling despite the less-than-ideal conditions they have found out on the road during the COVID-19 pandemic. Spring break was saved through service!"

— Rebecca Christiansen

Police parade

Today we had the awesome opportunity to "visit" some amazing residents at Cache Valley Assisted Living! Our caring... Posted by Logan City Police Department on Thursday, April 16, 2020

KSL.com’s Uplifting Utah column features feel-good stories sent in from people outside the newsroom. To share the stories that have made your day better, email them in 200 words or less to web@ksl.com and we'll pick some to share. Photos and videos are encouraged*. Stories may be edited for length and clarity.

*By submitting a photo, you affirm you own or otherwise control each photograph/video/image submitted. Once submitted, Deseret Digital Media, the operator of KSL.com, and its affiliates shall have a non-exclusive right and license in perpetuity to use the photo/video/image, or any portion thereof, in any and all media throughout the world. This includes the removal of copyright stamps for on-air use.

×

Related Stories