Harvey Weinstein is speaking out to media sources after a turbulent week that left one of the most powerful movie executives in Hollywood without a job and his professional and personal relationships in ruins.

Weinstein, cofounder of the movie hit-making Weinstein Company, was rocked by stories from The New York Times and New Yorker magazine detailing years of alleged sexual harassment and abuse claims.

Weinstein's wife, fashion designer Georgina Chapman, announced publicly that she was leaving him this week after the allegations became public, the New York Post reported.

"There has been a lot of pain for my family that I take responsibility for," Weinstein said in a statement to USA Today through his spokeswoman Sallie Hofmeister. "I sat down with my wife, Georgina, who I love more than anything, and we discussed what was best for our family. We discussed the possibility of a separation and I encouraged her to do what was in her heart.

"In the end, she made the decision to separate. I understand, I love her and I love our children and hopefully, when I am better, I will be in their lives again. I support her decision. I am in counseling and perhaps, when I am better, we can rebuild."

Weinstein told the New York Post Page Six that he "fully supports" his wife's decision to leave.

"I didn’t stand in Georgina's way when we discussed a separation, I encouraged her to do what was in her heart," he said. "I know she has to do what is best for the children, for herself and her business. She employs 130 people."

He was fired from the company he cofounded, the Weinstein Company, in light of the allegations, the Post noted.

Weinstein's name has been connected with some of Hollywood's biggest hits, like "Shakespeare in Love," "My Left Foot," "The Piano," "Good Will Hunting," "The English Patient," "The Crying Game," "Pulp Fiction," "Chicago," "The Artist," "The Aviator," "Silver Linings Playbook," and "The Iron Lady," noted IndieWire.

His companies have accounted for 303 Academy Award nominations and 75 Oscar wins over the past 30 years, noted IndieWire.

But now the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences will consider taking away his membership in the light of the sexual allegations, two academy sources told IndieWire.com.