A few days before the collapse of the Islamic State’s caliphate, I visited one of the new “pop-up prisons” that had been hastily converted to hold thousands of surrendering ISIS fighters in Syria. The numbers wildly exceeded all expectations, including estimates by U.S. intelligence. The most striking sight at the prison entrance was a mound of human hair lying on the raw concrete floor. Clumps of it—some brown, some graying, most of it greasy or matted—had been shaved off the heads and faces of fighters before they were taken to group cells. “Lice,” one of the guards told me.

The prison at Dashisha, in eastern Deir Ezzor province, had been an oil-storage facility. In just four days, the compound of modest brick and stucco buildings had been filled with fifteen hundred fighters from countries on four continents, including France, Libya, Russia, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Morocco, Iraq, and the United States, the warden told me. Average-sized rooms had been fitted with metal doors; each cell had a small barred window that I had to stand on my tiptoes to peer through. Each one was crammed, wall to wall, with dozens of men squatting on the floor. The ISIS fighters wore new T-shirts, in army green, and whatever trousers they had on when they were captured.

After five years of war with the Islamic State, the biggest problem for the winners is coping with the losers. The aftermath has produced one of the world’s most perplexing postwar challenges: there are tens of thousands of captured ISIS members whom no nation wants to repatriate, and the local militia holding them has neither the resources nor the personnel to keep them indefinitely. More than five thousand ISIS fighters surrendered in the final month of fighting alone. Thousands more were captured earlier in the conflict. They’re dispersed among the new pop-up prisons in northeast Syria. A few hundred of the most severely wounded are in a small hospital, with the foreign fighters crowded in its basement for security. The hospital stench was overwhelming, even through a mask. “Sepsis,” a medic told me. Between December and March, another sixty-three thousand family members of ISIS fighters—wives enveloped in black niqabs that cover their faces, and bedraggled young children—also poured out of Baghouz, the last ISIS redoubt in Syria. They’re held separately, most in tents, at a dusty, malodorous camp in al-Hawl that already held ten thousand. The prisons, the hospital, and the camp are all bursting.

“There is nothing else in the world that compares to this unprecedented humanitarian and security situation, which is legally complicated and politically fraught,” a senior State Department official told me. So far, the local Syrian Democratic Forces militia (S.D.F.), the U.S.-led coalition of more than seventy countries, and several international relief agencies have been improvising—total ad-hockery, in the words of a senior U.S. military commander involved in Syria.

Just sorting out the fighters’ real names and nationalities has been messy. Many use noms de guerre. Few have identity papers or passports. Some don’t want to reveal their identities—or their roles with ISIS. I interviewed three of the prison’s foreign detainees: a middle-aged misfit from Chicago, who was lured to Syria by ISIS propaganda; a Moroccan who, as an “emir of morality,” acknowledged witnessing at least ten stonings of women accused of adultery and the burning of some forty Yazidi women who were put in a cage, covered with fuel, and set on fire; and a lanky Turk with a prosthetic leg, which was his souvenir from a U.S. air strike. The Turk, Farouk Asser, insisted that he once worked at a pizza parlor in Istanbul and, after joining ISIS, merely worked as a cook and at a local police station. Every few sentences, the warden muttered, “He’s a liar. He’s a liar.” Asser, according to the warden, was one of the early ISIS recruiters who helped foreign fighters cross the border from Turkey into Syria.

The pop-up prisons are combustible politically and vulnerable physically, a dozen U.S. diplomats and military officials told me. ISIS has its roots in an earlier prison culture—notably in Abu Ghraib and Camp Bucca, two infamous prisons in Iraq that were run by the United States between 2003 and 2011. Its founding “caliph,” Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, was held at Camp Bucca for nine months, in 2004. He and other future ISIS leaders created an embryonic network there.

The movement grew rapidly after Baghdadi pronounced, in 2012, that its first priority should be “releasing Muslim prisoners everywhere, and chasing and eliminating judges and investigators and their guards.” Over the next year, Al Qaeda in Iraq attacked eight prisons. In July, 2013, more than five hundred inmates—including top Al Qaeda leaders sentenced to death—were freed in final simultaneous attacks on two prisons, including Abu Ghraib. Many inmates escaped into Syria, where Al Qaeda in Iraq evolved into the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria. The prison raids—the so-called breaking-the-walls campaign—provided the first evidence that Baghdadi’s men were “a professional military force capable of planning, training, resourcing and executing synchronized and complex attacks,” as the Institute for the Study of War reported. By 2014, ISIS had enough men to blitz across Syria and Iraq, and captured territory the size of Britain. Despite its recent loss of terrain in both Syria and Iraq, U.S. military and S.D.F. officials told me, ISIS underground cells still have those basic capabilities. Prison breaks, they added, are almost certain to be one way that the group tries to rebuild.

“My goal wasn’t to come fight, it was making hegira,” or to re-create the Prophet Muhammad’s migration from Mecca to Medina, Lirim Sulejmani, an American prisoner from Chicago, said. Photograph Courtesy Robin Wright

The first prisoner I interviewed at Dashisha was Lirim Sulejmani, the American from Chicago. He had surrendered two weeks earlier. He was balding and thin; he told me that he was forty-three. His arms were awkwardly handcuffed behind him with thin plastic bands. He seemed detached, and both physically and psychologically defeated. We sat on the floor of the prison’s makeshift office, which had no furniture. His wife and three children were probably at the al-Hawl camp, he said, but he wasn’t sure. He was sucked into ISIS by its utopian promises. “I wanted to make hegira,” he told me. “I wanted to live under Sharia,” or Islamic law. Hegira, traditionally used to describe the Prophet Muhammad’s migration from Mecca to Medina to escape persecution, had become an ISIS buzzword—and a recruiting tool. The pull is as powerful as the idea of jihad. After Baghdadi declared the Islamic State, in 2014, he appealed to Muslims worldwide to make hegira, to re-create a country that ruled as in the Prophet’s time, fourteen centuries ago.

Up to three hundred Americans attempted to join or succeeded in joining jihadist movements in Syria and Iraq, according to a 2014 report by George Washington University’s Program on Extremism. Dozens were arrested before they left the United States. More than a hundred ended up fighting with ISIS, according to Chuck Hagel, who was then the Defense Secretary. A few rose to leadership positions. The Americans tended to fall into three categories: the early pioneers and ideologues who brought skills with them; the “networked travelers” who had personal connections with others in ISIS; and the loners, lured by propaganda, who made their own way to the Islamic State. When ISIS lost its last piece of territory, on March 23rd, fewer than two dozen Americans—fighters and family members—were found among the tens of thousands, U.S. officials told me. Sulejmani’s family accounted for five of them. Many other Americans are presumed to have died, possibly in U.S. air strikes.