CLOSE

Gov. Doug Ducey on Wednesday announced that buildings and structures around Arizona, including the state Capitol, would be lit blue as a "symbol of support" for medical workers and first responders on the front lines of the new coronavirus outbreak.

Other buildings participating in the "Light AZ Blue" campaign include Phoenix Children's Hospital, the cities of Phoenix, Tempe and Tucson as well as State Farm's property at Tempe Town Lake.

“Arizona is immensely grateful to our frontline medical workers and all the men and women who have stepped up to keep others safe and healthy,” Ducey wrote in a statement. “They are heroes. Their efforts are saving lives, and Arizona salutes their service during this critical time.”

A press release announcing the measure included steps Arizona has taken to assist the community during the outbreak, which included Ducey partnering with Superintendent of Public Instruction Kathy Hoffman to launch an effort providing child care for children of essential employees and Ducey issuing an executive order to "help boost medical staffing levels and provide certainty and liability protections" to health care workers.

CLOSE The Arizona Capitol in Phoenix is illuminated with blue light to honor essential front-line workers and health care professionals. Arizona Republic

The press release also noted the partnership between the state of Arizona and the University of Arizona to provide antibody tests for 250,000 health care professionals and first responders.

More than 9,000 health care workers across the country contracted COVID-19 as of last week and at least 27 died, according to a report released on Tuesday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Reach the reporter at bfrank@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8529. Follow her on Twitter @brieannafrank.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral today.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona/2020/04/15/arizona-buildings-lit-blue-honor-medical-workers-first-responders/5139859002/