As the government seemingly tarries, both at the federal and state level, I’m fascinated to see what some of the country’s wealthiest people are up to. It’s a fascinating case study into some of our rigid political dogma unfolding in real time.

Just so we’re clear, I’m well aware that there are plenty of uber-wealthy Hollywood elites who are responding to the global crisis by recording communist anthems sung off-key from their winter mansions in Barbados.

But there are others, like NFL owner Robert Kraft who sent his team’s plane overseas on a mercy mission:

The New England Patriots private plane was flown into China to secure about 1.7 million (N95) masks for health care workers on the front lines of the coronavirus outbreak and returned to Massachusetts where most of the supply will be distributed.



Kraft reportedly personally purchased 300,000 masks which he planned to give to New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo for that state’s battle against COVID-19, according to the Boston Globe.



“The Krafts were terrific. They were a phone call away, and immediately went to work on the logistics associated with this, and did not stop until they could make it happen,” Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker said, referring to Kraft and his son, Jonathan Kraft who is president of both the Patriots and the Kraft Group while also serving as the chairman of the board at Massachusetts General Hospital.

Remarkable generosity. And he wasn’t alone. A large number of business executives, including billionaires and millionaires, have donated generously to combat the virus and work towards its cure. In particular:

Bill Gates is setting up factories to manufacture 7 leading vaccine candidates before we know which is best & safest; we can test the vaccines in parallel, and then throw away all but the factory for the best vaccine. May save many months.



Just extraordinary. pic.twitter.com/JGjkJ6FKNa — michael_nielsen (@michael_nielsen) April 4, 2020

All of this is marvelous philanthropy that is deserving of appreciation and gratitude. But it’s also, as I mentioned, a good case study for our future political discussions.

Every election cycle we are treated to the socialist claptrap of railing against billionaires and millionaires. The Bernie-Sandersization of our politics. But suppose the government through heavy-handed confiscatory taxation had been allowed to plunder the billions of dollars that are currently being spent by these philanthropists. Tell me honestly if you think that it would have been utilized in as advantageous a way as it currently is being spent? If your answer is yes, then fine. But if your answer is no, then what does tell us?

Of course it doesn’t take a global pandemic for us to realize this. Ask yourself when you want to do something good for your fellow man, do you write a check to a local charity or send in some extra to the government?

It seems COVID-19 is offering us yet another chance to wake-up to the reality that private property isn’t all about greed, no matter what the truly greedy among us – the politicians – want you to believe.