CLOSE

Rosellani and Traci Esposito. (Photo: Greg Esposito)

Traci Esposito's twice-weekly trips to Target with daughter Rosellani had become somewhat of a ritual since the beginning of the last school year.

Traci, who spent 10 years as a teacher before becoming a stay-at-home mom and freelance editor, used the trips to reinforce whatever Rosellani was learning in school.

"If she was focusing on triangles or the color orange at school, then we would find those things in Target," she says. "We would walk around and count objects." And Rossellani loved Bullseye, the Target dog mascot.

"I think more than anything it's about the ritual and the connection and her just feeling safe and having something fun to do."

After the coronavirus lockdown, the Espositos tried to keep things in their Mesa home as normal as possible for Rosellani, but the Target visits had to end.

When Rosellani's dad, Greg, walked her to the mailbox last week to get some fresh air, he asked her how she was feeling.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

One of the things 3-year-old Rosellani Esposito misses most about being in lockdown is going to Target, so her mother recreated her own store in their house. (Photo: Greg Esposito)

"She said, 'OK, but I really wish that coronavirus would end so I could go back to Target,'" he said. "It came off super sweet, but also kind of sad."

It hit Greg hard.

"You could hear it in her voice that just the sense of normalcy wasn't there," he says.

Greg told Traci about their conversation, "and she immediately was like, 'we've got to make her a Target store.'"

They decided to make it an Easter surprise.

Traci headed to Target — without Rosellani — and spoke to employees about what she wanted to do. They hooked her up with plenty of signs, pricing stickers and paper and plastic bags.

She found a table and a toy shopping cart and printed out logos.

"We set it up like it was a store," she says — merchandise and price tags. She placed Rosellani's Easter presents in Target bags.

Rosellani was overjoyed.

Rosellani Esposito shows off the "purchases" she made at the Target store her mother created in their Mesa home. (Photo: Greg Esposito)

"She screamed," Traci says. "And then she was kind of just like really quiet and taking it all in."

The novelty hasn't worn off.

"We've played Target at least a dozen times in two days," she says.

Greg, who works as communications manager for the National Academy of Sports Medicine and hosts a Phoenix Suns podcast, normally doesn't like to share anything personal on social media, but he decided in this case to make an exception and tweet it out to his nearly 12,000 Twitter followers.

"I kind of had the feeling that if this could give somebody else an idea of what they could do for their kid to bring a smile on their face or something," he says, "I'd put it out there."

John D'Anna is a reporter on the Arizona Republic/azcentral.com storytelling team. Reach him at john.danna@arizonarepublic.com and follow him on Twitter @azgreenday.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/mesa/2020/04/14/their-daughter-needed-normal-life-coronavirus-lockdown-answer-target/2989934001/