CLOSE

Four blocks from my house, there’s a yard with the most gorgeous hollyhocks. I must have walked my dogs past the little bungalow dozens of times on our 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. walks, but the hollyhocks never caught my attention.

A few homes down the street, chickens scratched the ground behind a nondescript brick home. African daisies bobbed among aloe vera plants in a weedy space between an alley and a median.

For the more than 20 years I’ve lived and walked in my central Phoenix historic neighborhood, these details were lost amid doggie poop pickup stops, rogue chihuahua encounters and occasional chats with neighbors who happened to be out and about during my fringe-y walking hours.

Most of the homes in my corner of downtown are old, some coming up on 100 years in age, and encompass architectural styles including Tudor, hacienda, territorial, Art Moderne, English bungalows and a few new builds that attempt to replicate the neighborhood's historic vibe with varying degrees of success.

MORE THINGS TO DO: For restaurant reviews, travel tips, concert picks and more, subscribe to azcentral.com.

It took the COVID-19 pandemic for me to fully appreciate the diversity and weathered beauty of where I live.

Prior to the new reality of social distancing, my weeks were defined by a full-time, Monday through Friday job, a Saturday hike and Sundays doing house and yard work, and those dawn-dusk walks. Things have temporarily changed.

Even though most hiking trails are open, I’ve made the decision to forfeit my weekend excursions to avoid adding to the headaches of our already overburdened health-care workers and first responders. Of course, missing my weekly trips to explore new trails and places across Arizona has been tough. I miss it terribly. It’s as if a part of my brain shut down.

The void is blacker than I ever expected. Hiking is a big part of my life. As a hiker, risk-taking is part of my world view. And yet, these are not normal times. Choices are no longer individual, they are collective. I’m not willing to put others at risk for my personal satisfaction.

To keep my wanderlust under control, I’m hiking familiar sidewalks close to home, crossing streets when others approach and not worrying that I’ll get lost or seriously injured while doing so. It’s the same fresh air and mental health benefits I’d get on a trail.

While sidewalks may not provide the challenge of trails, rediscovering the treasures of my urban wilderness has been enlightening.

Also, I made some really bad paintings from some of my old trail photos.

Get inspiration for future hiking adventures at Mare Czinar's blog, arizonahiking.blogspot.com.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/travel/arizona/hiking/2020/04/09/avoiding-hiking-trails-during-coronavirus-explore-your-neighborhood-instead/2973750001/