Congressman Dan Crenshaw (R-Texas) called out Congressman Eric Swalwell (D-Calif.) after he claimed that the National Rifle Association (NRA) called for violence against Democratic lawmakers.

Swalwell saw an article in an NRA magazine titled “Target Practice” that outlined some of the concerns gun owners may have with proposed legislation that could greatly reduce the ability of gun transfers. The congressman hopped on Twitter and claimed that the article was calling for violence against anti-gun legislators. He even went as far as to say they should face legal repercussions for the article.

This is a call for violence by the @NRA against @GabbyGiffords, who was nearly killed by gunfire and @SpeakerPelosi, the most powerful legislator in America. The NRA should face legal consequences. But let’s put them out of business with boycotts and ballot boxes. #EnoughIsEnough pic.twitter.com/XFTAg5XJWI — Rep. Eric Swalwell (@RepSwalwell) February 23, 2019

This allegation against the NRA didn’t sit well for Crenshaw. He took to Twitter to call Swalwell out for “deliberately lying” about violence where it doesn’t exist.

How can you claim this? Are you deliberately lying or did you just not read it? The article is about legislation targeting gun owners, not the NRA targeting Democrats. If your goal is to ensure that “outrage culture” is alive and well, continuing to divide us, congrats. https://t.co/KsnSdPWPb6 — Dan Crenshaw (@DanCrenshawTX) February 24, 2019

He congratulated Swalwell for further creating division between groups of Americans by assuming the worst of those in the NRA.

Crenshaw was not alone in his criticism of Swalwell’s tweet. Several others found the tweet to be misleading, if not downright insulting because of Swalwell’s connection to former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords. Many felt he was exploiting her horrific shooting to degrade his political opponents.

Others just mocked Swalwell for an older tweet in which he alluded to the fact that the government could nuke the American people if they had an uprising with guns, as IJR previously reported.

https://twitter.com/McAllisterDen/status/1099396403175018503

https://twitter.com/AngeloRayGomez/status/1099398834403209216

This is the congressman that told the general public that he would gladly nuke us if we didn’t give up our guns… .@RepSwalwell sit down https://t.co/0ar6SJCuIN — Antonia Okafor Cover (@antonia_okafor) February 24, 2019

This creep is exactly why you must buy guns and ammunition…when not threatening to murder millions of Americans for disobeying liberals, he wants dissenters to "face legal consequences" for speaking out against liberals.

He's exactly why we have, and need, the #2A. https://t.co/DGo5eTEi1U — Kurt Schlichter (@KurtSchlichter) February 23, 2019

The policy that the original NRA article was focused on is H.R. 8, a House bill that expands universal background checks. The bill has some bipartisan support, with a handful of Republicans joining Swalwell as a cosponsor to the legislation.

Although there are some Republican supporters of the legislation, many are concerned, as the NRA was, that the limit on weapon transfers would make gun ownership difficult.

According to an analysis of the bill by Reason, H.R. 8 would require each exchange of a weapon be processed by a gun store. That means even loaning a gun to a friend to go hunting would be illegal unless a gun store processed the exchange.

While the bill may make it through the House, it is unlikely it will find as much support in the Republican-controlled Senate.

Published in