AP Images for SELF

As of January 2019, only 24 companies in the S&P 500 had CEOs that were women - that's 4.8% (Catalyst, 2019)

In Emily Bazelon's New York Times article, "A Head at the Seat of the Table," Kathryn Phillips PhD described the double-bind women face in the workplace. "If they’re perceived as nice and warm and nurturing, as they’re expected to be, they don’t show what it takes to move into a leadership position. But when they take charge to get things done, they’re often seen as angrier or more aggressive than men," Phillips said.

One major issue in gender bias in the workplace is the belief in stereotypes of what men and women "should be." Gender stereotypes lead to men in the workplace being deemed as "competitive" and "independent," while women in the workplace are deemed as "cooperative" (Smith et al. 2018). Leaders in an individualistic culture, such as the dominant culture in the United States, are typically defined as those that "rise above" the rest and exert a great deal of influence over others (Triandis, 2018). Therefore, women in leadership roles are viewed as not fitting in with preconceived notions of what they "should be" in the workplace (Smith, et al. 2018).

Let's back up a little first. How do we as a society define "authentic leadership"? Does that contribute to the issue? The Authentic Leadership Questionnaire (ALQ), consists of the following constructs: leader self-awareness, relational transparency, internalized moral perspective, and balanced processing (Walumba, et al., 2008). Self-awareness is the ability of the leader to identify his own strengths, limitations, and impact on others; relational transparency is the ability of the leader to have open dialogue between subordinates and himself, allowing for positive and negative feedback; internalized moral perspective is the ability to hold a high standard of ethical conduct; balanced processing is the degree to which a leader elicits effective opinions prior to action (Avolio, et al., 2007). Upon examination these leadership characteristics appear to be genderless; one cannot inherently view these these characteristics as primarily male or female.

Then how does gender play into the equation of communication and leadership? Is one solution making people aware of rigid views of gender roles, hoping that identification of these biases leads to the dismantling of them? When people have strong gender stereotypes, they are less likely to believe that gender disparity in the workplace is due to discrimination (Cundiff and Vescio, 2016).

Do we need to directly address gender bias in workplace communication through trainings or even sanctions? Gender bias in the workplace leads to lack of communication towards women; workplace information being withheld from women; the unwritten rules of the workplace not being shared with women; and lack of face-to-face communication with women. These types of behaviors can be considered gaslighting - intentionally altering information in order to create a disadvantage. Consider that interpersonal communication can be more important than written communication, especially in regards to gender-specific topics in the workplace (Anderson, et al., 2015). When communication is weaponized against women in the workplace, it is no wonder that women are so underrepresented in leadership roles.

It is when we confront these disparities in workplace communication and dismantle gender stereotypes that women will have a greater chance in obtaining leadership roles.