All Bay Area counties, followed by the state of California, have announced shelter-in-place orders restricting many forms of nonessential activities. Grocery stores, restaurants and other food retailers are deemed essential, though the new orders will change the way we feed ourselves and our families.

Q: Can I buy groceries?

A: Yes. The shelter-in-place orders make an exception for grocery shopping, which is considered an essential activity.

Q: What resources are available if I’m having trouble getting food?

A: If you’re a youth or student, there may be school meal kits available for you. Seniors and people with disabilities may be eligible to receive community meals, and many grocery stores offer senior-only hours. New rules have made it easier to apply for CalFresh (formerly known as food stamps), and California is trying to get permission from the federal government to introduce home delivery for CalFresh recipients. Don’t forget about food banks, which serve anyone in need throughout the Bay Area. San Francisco residents can consult the San Francisco Food Resource Map on www.sf.gov.

Q: Can I bring my own reusable bags to the grocery store?

A: For the moment, no. Six Bay Area counties are now requiring grocery stores to ban reusable bags as a measure to curb the spread of the virus. Stores will have to offer plastic and paper shopping bags while the shelter-in-place order remains in effect, and some stores are waiving bag fees.

Q: Are grocery stores totally out of food?

A: No. Some larger grocery stores are running out of certain items like toilet paper, instant noodles and rice, but many smaller neighborhood stores and ethnic grocers in particular are often fully stocked. In some cases, popular brands of certain products like cereal are sold out, but there are usually alternates available.

Q: What kinds of foods should I buy?

A: It’s good to buy a mixture of nonperishable items like canned beans or rice and fresh produce since it’s healthy and not in short supply. Look for fruits and vegetables that will last more than a few days in your kitchen, like potatoes, cabbages, onions, apples, carrots, squash and beets. Frozen produce, like spinach or peas, are a great way to get a little bit of color into that pasta sauce or curry from your pantry. Don’t forget cooking basics like vegetable oil. You can find 25 recipes that you can make from a well-stocked pantry at www.sfchronicle.com/food.

Q: Should I buy extra food in case stores run out?

Read More

A: Because so many people are panic buying, that can lead to shortages of essential items like baby formula. Politicians like Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., have urged the public not to hoard food so that the needy in particular don’t face shortages.

Q: Can I contract the coronavirus through food?

A: There is currently no evidence that the coronavirus has been transmitted through food, according to the CDC. No matter what, it’s still a good idea to wash your hands before preparing or eating food, and to wash produce as you normally would. .

Q: Are grocery stores limiting the number of customers who can enter at once?

A: Yes. Many Bay Area grocery stores have been limiting the number of customers allowed in the store at a single time, though some stores have imposed no such limitations. The orders require stores to create and post a plan to enforce “social distancing,” maintaining a 6-foot separation between shoppers including in lines.

Q: Can I get grocery delivery?

A: Yes, many grocery stores offer delivery, but there are delays on popular delivery services like Amazon Fresh and Instacart. You can find a full list of Bay Area grocers offering delivery on SFChronicle.com.

Q: Are restaurants serving food?

A: Yes. The shelter-in-place order allows restaurants to continue operating for takeout and delivery only. Many do so via third-party apps like DoorDash, Grubhub, Postmates and Uber Eats, while others offer takeout or delivery through their websites or via text message. On March 16, the California Department of Public Health said that restaurants throughout the state should be closed for in-restaurant seated dining.

You can find a full list of Bay Area restaurants offering takeout or delivery on SFChronicle.com. You can also get wine delivered from wine shops and wineries, and you can even get craft cocktails delivered, thanks to temporarily relaxed regulations from the state’s Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

Q: What kind of restaurants are open?

A: Bars were ordered to close, while restaurants, bakeries and cafes that offer food to go may remain open, though some have chosen to close temporarily. Many restaurants have been forced to lay off many of their employees.

Q: Are there shortages of fresh food like milk and eggs?

A: As of yet, there are no shortages of fresh food in the Bay Area. The farms and food manufacturers that always provide grocery stores with food are not experiencing any disruptions. It is taking some stores longer to restock their shelves with items like dairy, but the supply is not in danger of running out. People may be buying more food than normal, but there’s no reason to believe that they’re eating more.

Esther Mobley is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writers. Email: emobley@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @Esther_mobley