One hundred and fifty years ago, the California Legislature signed a bill authorizing the creation of a large city park in San Francisco. It was the beginning of one of the greatest urban parks in the world. This column has featured archive photos of the park’s attractions, but in honor of Golden Gate Park’s 150th anniversary, I found a variety of photos of people enjoying the park throughout the 20th century from the dozens of packs of negatives we have in The Chronicle archive - many of which haven’t been published in decades.

San Francisco city officials purchased 1,040 acres of land west of Stanyan Street, all the way to the ocean.

“We are likely to have a park within five years,” an 1870 Chronicle editorial wrote. “Not as elegant and magnificent as Central Park Gotham, but sufficiently so to suit the not over-fastidious tastes of San Franciscans.”

But transforming the land into an urban park was especially difficult. An article at the time in the Santa Rosa Press-Democrat described the site in the Outside Lands as “a dreary waste of shifting sands where not even a blade of grass can grow without four posts to support it.”

But by 1892, 250 acres had been cultivated in the eastern part of the park, with more than 100,000 trees planted. Seventeen miles of roads, including three bridges, had been completed.

Dig deep into Chronicle Vault Like what you’re reading? Subscribe to the Chronicle Vault newsletter and get classic archive stories in your inbox twice a week. Read hundreds of historical stories, see thousands of archive photos and sort through 154 years of classic Chronicle front pages at SFChronicle.com/vault.

Read More

An 1892 Chronicle article described the process used to turn the dunes into the rolling hills of forests and grass we see today. European beach grass was imported to the park and continually replanted.

“This useful weed multiples with exceeding rapidity,” The Chronicle reported. “A single root in the ground will in a few weeks shoot out sixty more roots.” The quick growing roots formed “a net binding the sand and preventing its shifting” and the “large quantity of sodium in the sea beach grass,” combined with the silicates in the sand “renders the subsequent cultivation of the land possible.” Park workers then added a shrub-like plant called lupine, cut the shrub short and “the sand is ready to receive soil and loam, and on this the growing of grass is no difficult matter.” (Today, European beach grass is considered an invasive species on the Pacific coast).

The first building in the park was the Conservatory, constructed in 1879 and still standing today. A playground was completed in 1888, and the oldest monument in the part is a statue dedicated in 1885 honoring Ohio-born President, James A. Garfield, who had been assassinated in September 1881.

The California Midwinter International Exposition of 1894, a World’s Fair, brought big changes to the park: the original building for the de Young museum and the Japanese Tea Garden were initially built for the exposition.

But the person with the most lasting impact on Golden Gate Park was John McLaren, the park superintendent for 53 years, from 1890 until his death in 1943. Hand-picked by the park's original designer, William Hammond Hall, McLaren is said to have planted more than 2 million trees. He preferred nature over man’s creations and fought to minimize the incursion of statues and buildings, even planting more trees and bushes around monuments to minimize their impact.

“The people who worked for McLaren regarded him as an odd mixture of ill-tempered manager, exacting gardener and sly martinet,” Chronicle reporter Kenneth Garcia wrote in a 1997 history. “In truth he could be as cold as a summer day in the Sunset.”

“His battles with the city’s power elite were legion,” Garcia wrote. He stopped the Municipal Railway from running a line through the park and the city Planning Commission from extending Sunset Boulevard all the way through the park.

“The chief of the Park Police Station sought to remove an oak tree that he felt was too close to his district headquarters,” Park historian Ray Clary recalled. “McLaren told him, ‘I'm a reasonable man. Let's compromise and you move the station.’”

A century and a half later, the park has become a crucial part of the city’s recreation and entertainment. As Margot Patterson Doss wrote in her April 5, 1970, column celebrating the park’s centennial: “Fair or foggy, it is as good walking now, even as it was 100 years ago.”

More from Chronicle Vault

• Where’s the monastery in Golden Gate Park? From Hearst to monks, rubble from historic monastery finds new life.

• S.F.’s Aquatic Park: From dream to disaster to New Deal landmark.

• Secret Garden: The mysteries of Shakespeare Garden in Golden Gate Park.

• S.F.’s most remote residents: Farallones quest for a 1950 census taker and The Chronicle.

From the Archive is a weekly column by Bill Van Niekerken, the library director of The Chronicle, exploring the depths of the newspaper’s archive. It’s part of Chronicle Vault, a twice-weekly newsletter highlighting more than 150 years of San Francisco stories. It is edited by Taylor Kate Brown, The Chronicle’s newsletter editor. Sign up for the newsletter here and follow Chronicle Vault on Instagram. Contact Bill at bvanniekerken@sfchronicle.com and Taylor at taylor.brown@sfchronicle.com.