Warriors star Stephen Curry says he was the first player tested for the coronavirus

Golden State Warriors guard Stephen Curry smiles on the bench as players warm up before an NBA basketball game between the Warriors and the Los Angeles Lakers in San Francisco, Thursday, Feb. 27, 2020. Curry wrote an essay for Time where he discussed being tested for the coronavirus. less Golden State Warriors guard Stephen Curry smiles on the bench as players warm up before an NBA basketball game between the Warriors and the Los Angeles Lakers in San Francisco, Thursday, Feb. 27, 2020. Curry ... more Photo: Jeff Chiu / Associated Press Photo: Jeff Chiu / Associated Press Image 1 of / 78 Caption Close Warriors star Stephen Curry says he was the first player tested for the coronavirus 1 / 78 Back to Gallery

For more coverage, visit our complete coronavirus section here.

Warriors star Stephen Curry revealed that he was the first player in the NBA to be tested for the coronavirus in an essay for Time published Thursday.

Curry wrote that he was tested on March 6, just one day after returning from a broken left hand.

"I had just played my first basketball game in months the night before, and conversations were swirling about what this virus might mean for the league," Curry wrote. "That night, I started to feel sick. The fever set in. First at 100. Then 101. My first thought was, 'What are the chances? Could this really happen?'"

Curry's test came back negative, but the experience rattled him.

Recommended Video:

"But that experience hit me, and it hit me hard," he wrote. "I'm fortunate to have the job I do, and not have to worry about all the many things crippling families across the country during this pandemic: unemployment, hunger, housing. How couldn't I use all of my resources and the full power of the platform my wife and I have built to help those desperately in need during this time?"

Since the shelter-in-place order on March 16, Curry has used his star power and the power of social media to do what he can during the coronavirus pandemic.

He has spoken on Instagram with Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and a member of the White House Coronavirus Task Force. He surprised front-line health care workers at Alta Bates Summit Medical Center in Oakland with a FaceTime call. And he and his wife Ayesha donated 1,000 meals for Oakland schoolchildren during the shelter in place.

Steph even showed that he's just like the rest of us by struggling for five hours to set up a basketball hoop in his driveway.

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

Sign up for 'The Daily' newsletter for the latest on coronavirus here.

Matthew Tom is a Homepage Editor at SFGATE. Email: mtom@sfgate.com.