Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-MN) is learning the hard way that you can’t please everyone, and that includes anti-Semites and anti-Israel activists on social media.

Omar is, of course, well known to moderate Democrats and Republicans for her recent series of anti-Semitic and anti-Israel remarks, often accusing her Jewish colleagues of “dual loyalty” to both the United States and Israel, and implying that pro-Israel organizations like AIPAC are compromising Congress on behalf of the Israeli government.

The comments have divided her Democratic colleagues, who have waffled between censuring her for relying on anti-Semitic smears, and watering down their criticism out of fear they will alienate younger, more progressive aspects of their base.

Over the weekend, Omar penned an op-ed in The Washington Post, attempting to bridge the divide, explaining in detail,her position on foreign policy as it applies to Israel and the Palestinians. In it, Omar unexpectedly advocated for a “two-state solution” rather than the complete destruction of the Jewish state, something her colleagues in the BDS (or “boycott-divest-sanction”) movement openly support.

The op-ed drew skepticism from moderate Democrats and most Republicans, but in a strange twist, it drew open scorn from anti-Israel activists and anti-Semites on Twitter, who had come to believe Omar was one of their own, only to be “betrayed” by her embrace of the only slightly less radical “two-state solution.”

When she tweeted out her op-ed, things got really hairy.

“When it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we must fight for self-determination, security, and peace for both peoples. That’s why I support a two-state solution,” she tweeted.

When it comes to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we must fight for self-determination, security, and peace for both peoples. That’s why I support a two-state solution. — Ilhan Omar (@IlhanMN) March 18, 2019

Things only went downhill from there.

Very disappointing. The two-state solution is definitely not viable, given both the extent of the occupation and Israel’s demand for control over West Bank security. And any settlement that denies the Palestinian right of return is thoroughly unjust. https://t.co/RD6mwOtAWO — Putting the Rad back in Radical Islamic Terrorism (@realPabloBlart) March 19, 2019

WHAT WHAT WHAT WHAT https://t.co/hWgPlc0WFk — mo salad (@curlyflyaways) March 19, 2019

We love a queen that supports apartheid! https://t.co/EcVoC8V1Jn — Luisa (@Luisamalia) March 18, 2019

At least one angry supporter even declared Omar, “cancelled.”

Others accused the outspoken Muslim Congresswoman of stepping on the toes of Palestinians, who should be allowed to determine their own form of “liberation,” not be dictated to by an “imperialist.”

I do not think it is our role or place to say 1 or 2 state. What do Palestinians want? Why should the USA have ANY say? https://t.co/4uv0esfZZW — That Diva Tracy (@ThatDivaTracy) March 18, 2019

How about the US respect someone’s soverignty and stay the hell out of these kinds of decisions, for a change? If you want people to be self-deterministic, let them decide their own fate without your country’s involvement. Novel thought? https://t.co/5ZzExOBHKx — Jeremy Tregunna (@jtregunna) March 19, 2019

Her detractors even include the woman who confronted Chelsea Clinton at a memorial for the victims of a New Zealand mass shooting that took place in two mosques last week.

The replies to Omar’s tweet are even worse.

two state solution is trash… it plays into the hands of israeli occupation because it is basically impossible to do at this point. — fellow precariat (@jrwall9) March 18, 2019

There is no two state solution. That died before it was born. Stop listening to Democrats. — benay (@Iron87102) March 19, 2019

“Two state solution” but Israel is the one committing all these unethical crimes against Palestinians. The only solution is for Israel to restore Palestine, stop bombing them, stop the concentration camps, & to go back to their own territory pre-attack leaving them alone forever. — The Doñ Gastón (@MusicHead2011) March 19, 2019

That’s a pretty tough break for Ilhan’s supporters, but they can take comfort in knowing she probably doesn’t really mean it.