In this Feb. 22, 2018, photo, Dana Loesch, spokeswoman for the National Rifle Association, speaks at the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), at National Harbor, Md. She is poised, photogenic and articulate _ the new public face of an organization that long has been associated with older white men. Yet Loesch is not softening the message of an organization that has morphed from a hunting and Second Amendment rights advocacy group into an active voice in the nation’s culture wars, with positions on everything from immigration to socialism. (AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin)

In the midst of the pandemic Star Wars actor, Mark ‘Luke Skywalker’ Hamill came to an amazing conclusion but I don’t think he exactly expected it to turn out as he planned.

Last month was the first March without a school shooting in 18 years.

That's it. That's the tweet. — Mark Hamill (@HamillHimself) April 17, 2020

Ya think? So many points/liberal arguments destroyed in that one tweet.

Argument for home schooling? Check.

So you mean it isn’t Republicans in power in the White House who are responsible for school shootings if they’ve been going on for more than 18 years? Check.

You mean school shootings were stopped under Trump? Check.

But Dana Loesch schooled him with the best response.

In March alone background checks for gun purchases set a new record — the highest in a single month since the BGC system was created. Thanks for confirming that guns aren’t the issue. https://t.co/Eja1yWtWgA — Dana Loesch (@DLoesch) April 17, 2020

Indeed. People concerned about things with the pandemic have skyrocketed buying guns.

Most kids are now home, getting homeschooled through parents or through their schools.

So people/kids with issues are the problem? Who would have thought? Sure sounds like a terrific endorsement of homeschooling.

But we’d also note another flaw in the argument of Skywalker.

When we talk about “school shootings,” people generally immediately think you’re talking about a Parkland or a Columbine situation. Yet, “school shooting” is a malleable term that depends on who is recording the incident. So for example, it can include someone shooting a BB gun at an empty school bus in a parking lot. Or a mugging that just happens to occur near a school. Then there are the the school shootings that are kids getting in a fight with each other where one person is the victim/target, not a mass shooting, but still a shooting in a school.”School shootings” also include colleges. Most are not in fact, mass shootings. But that is how many translate that term when it is used. So the argument that this is the “first month” in 18 years depends on how you count things, with an expansive terminology or not.

But Loesch definitely did score a direct hit.

The Force is VERY strong in @DLoesch! She literally just took out a Jedi with a single tweet. https://t.co/aacB7quC1y — Ryan Moore (@RyanMoore) April 17, 2020