From the Spanish flu to zika: How coronavirus compares

SPANISH FLU (1918-20) Death count - Up to 100 million The world's first H1N1 pandemic occurred at the end of the World War I, infecting over a quarter of the world's population and resulting in as many as 100 million deaths. The death toll was unusually high due to a population already malnourished from the war, increasing susceptibility. It was arguably the deadliest epidemic in human history, vying with the Black Plague of the 14th century for this inglorious title. less SPANISH FLU (1918-20) Death count - Up to 100 million The world's first H1N1 pandemic occurred at the end of the World War I, infecting over a quarter of the world's population and resulting in as many as 100 ... more Photo: National Museum Of Health And Medicine // Wikimedia Commons Photo: National Museum Of Health And Medicine // Wikimedia Commons Image 1 of / 33 Caption Close From the Spanish flu to zika: How coronavirus compares 1 / 33 Back to Gallery

The current coronavirus outbreak has been the news story of the year (and it's been a busy year — remember that impeachment thing?).

From when a cluster of pneumonia cases was found in and around Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan, China, in late December 2019, to recent deaths from Australia to Italy, the outbreak has gripped the world. We're in the midst of one of the biggest global health emergencies of our time, and only time will tell how it goes down in history.

ALSO: France fights mask hoarding

The effects of COVID-19 on patients can vary from no symptoms at all, a shortness of breath and fatigue to a progression into pneumonia and multi-organ failure in the most vulnerable people. But how does the coronavirus epidemic (which is yet to be officially defined as a "pandemic") compare to outbreaks of the past?

As of Tuesday, just over two months since its inception, COVID-19 has infected over 90,000 people in 80 countries on every continent except Antarctica, killing over 3,000.

Take a look at the slideshow above to see how many lives were lost throughout historical infectious outbreaks over the years, from 1918's devastating Spanish Flu, through the smallpox outbreak in India in the '70s, to the current COVID-19 emergency.

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

A full list of online coronavirus resources: Where to get your questions answered

Live updates: A rundown of coronavirus cases in the Bay Area

How to tell if you have a cold, the flu, or coronavirus

6 things travelers should know in the age of coronavirus

The worst myths and misinformation about coronavirus

Are the elderly at a greater risk for coronavirus complications?

US Surgeon General: 'Seriously people - STOP BUYING MASKS'

Bay Area company to expand coronavirus drug trials to other companies

CDC warns men with beards amid coronavirus scare

Eerie photos show empty streets in Italy amid coronavirus fears

Andrew Chamings is a digital editor at SFGATE. Email: Andrew.Chamings@sfgate.com | Twitter: @AndrewChamings