CLOSE

James Bradley take a phone order at Matty G's. He and Madison Smith make up two-thirds of the staff on a busy Thursday night. (Photo: John D'Anna/The Republic)

It's the dinner rush, and James Bradley hasn't stopped moving.

"Thank you for calling Matty G's," he says into the phone cradled on his shoulder while he uses both gloved hands to pack Styrofoam containers of burgers and fries into a to-go bag.

Behind him, two other employees man the grill and do the prep work.

On the other side of the counter, half a dozen customers and a Grub Hub driver keep a safe social distance as they stand and wait patiently.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Bradley quickly strips off his gloves, puts on new ones and heads to the register.

"Sorry for the wait, what can I get you?" he says.

All the chairs are stacked on the tables, and the bar is closed.

On a normal Thursday night, there would be families sitting at those tables, the bar would be full, and there would be twice as many people serving.

But this is normal now, and Bradley isn't all that fond of it.

"We're understaffed to deal with all the extra work that's coming in," he says. "There's so much more work with a to-go order."

Like many small, independently restaurants, Matty G's has shifted to a takeout only system as it struggles to survive. (Photo: John D'Anna/The Republic)

Matty G's Steakburgers is one of the few locally owned restaurants in north-central Mesa and has opted to stay open with takeout-only service during the COVID-19 crisis.

The owners of the popular sports-themed neighborhood gathering place recently opened locations in Glendale and Scottsdale but they hadn't yet built enough of a following and were forced to close.

Bradley started working for the owners in another venture four years ago and began managing the Mesa location last year.

Since they shifted to a take-out only operation, sales are down between 25 and 35% on the best days, Bradley says. On a bad day, it's more like 65%.

Thursday is a pretty good day, but having fewer people doing more work is tough especially when everything comes in all at once.

"It's a totally different thing. It's weird, it makes the job harder," he says.

In addition to taking orders, waiting on customers and boxing and packing up food to go, Bradley also cooks at times, and of course, cleans.

He said the extra sanitation precautions aren't too bad.

"It's like we're the ones that were were prepared for this from the very beginning," he says. "We were already doing our best to sanitize everything...You go to the bank, and they were never doing sanitation practices but now they have to. We've always had to be clean. We're used to it. We get checked for it every month."

Bradley also tries not to worry too much about getting sick from a customer — his first concern is being able to put food on his own table for his wife and children.

"No matter what, we have to be here because we have to support our families," he says. "We're just hoping we don't get it because then you can't make money...our money comes day to day — we're essentially day laborers."

Outside, Chad Rogers waits for his order with his family, while one of his kids whizzes around on a skateboard.

"This place has been our savior for the last month," he says. "I'll bet we've been here 15 times. He (Bradley) already knows our order by heart when he sees us coming."

He notes that there aren't a lot of options for affordable food in the neighborhood.

"We need this," he says. "Without it we'd be going nuts."

And that really is the reason Bradley does what he does.

"I work in this industry because I like what I do," he says. "It's called the hospitality business for a reason. Half of my business talking to people, and they took away the most important part...the part where I'm out on the floor with people and making them feel welcome."

Bradley adds that customers seem to understand the situation and have been extremely patient.

"People have been responding really well," he says, and for the most part, have been tipping generously. "They're super nice, that's the best part of it," he says.

"I just can't wait for this all to be over."

James Bradley waits on a customer. (Photo: John D'Anna/The Republic)

John D'Anna is a reporter on the Arizona Republic/azcentral.com storytelling team. Reach him at john.danna@arizonarepublic.com and follow him on Twitter @azgreenday.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/mesa/2020/04/17/he-works-put-food-other-peoples-tables-so-he-can-put-food-his-matty-gs/5151867002/