CLOSE Arizona Gov. Doug Ducey issues a 'stay at home' order for residents on March 30, 2020, while also urging residents to keep active while practicing physical distancing. Arizona Republic

Gov. Doug Ducey signed an executive order on Monday calling on Arizonans to stay home to help curb the spread of the new coronavirus.

But he cautioned residents against rushing to hoard groceries, noting grocery stores will stay open.

And feel free to enjoy the nice spring weather, he said, just stay away from crowds.

So, what does the governor's executive order change about day-to-day life in Arizona? Here are some answers to questions raised by the action, which takes effect at 5 p.m. Tuesday.

Q: Can I still leave the house?

A: Yes. Residents may leave their homes to participate in what the state calls "essential functions." The state has deemed grocery stores and many other businesses to be "essential," for example, and those businesses can remain open for customers. Even restaurants and coffee shops may remain open for take-out service.

While the governor's order encourages Arizonans to stay home as much as possible, the governor also encouraged people who are not sick to get outside for exercise like hiking or cycling, while keeping a distance from others and from crowds.

Follow Arizona politics? Our reporters stay on top of it all. Subscribe now to azcentral.com.

Q: What are the "essential" services that can continue operating?

A: Ducey issued a very long list of essential services last week. It can be found here. These include:

Grocery stores, convenience stores, certified farmers' markets, farm and produce stands;

Health care services, such as hospitals, clinics and pharmacies;

Human services organizations, such as long-term care facilities, substance use disorder treatment facilities and shelters for people experiencing homelessness. In fact, people experiencing homelessness are exempt from the governor's directive but are urged to "obtain shelter as soon as possible and to the maximum extent practicable";

Banks, pawnbrokers and installment lenders;

Hardware stores;

Mail and shipping services;

Laundromats and dry cleaners;

Restaurants serving food for consumption off-premises;

Taxis and ridesharing services;

Home care services;

Day care centers;

Hotels and motels;

"Personal hygiene services" such as barbers and hair salons;

Newspapers and television and radio stations;

Bicycle shops;

Essential infrastructure operations, including construction, building management, landscaping, waste collection, distribution centers, airport operations as well as water, sewer and gas system operations.

Q: Do I need proof, like a note from my employer, that I am participating in an "essential" service or business?

A: No, the order says "no person shall be required to provide documentation or proof of their activities to justify their activities under this order."

Q: What is the penalty for violating the governor's order?

A: The governor's order cites a law that would seem to make any violation a Class I misdemeanor. However, the order also says "a person shall be notified and given an opportunity to comply" before any enforcement.

Q: Can I visit family members?

A: The governor's order allows caring for family members and pets in other households by classifying these activities as essential. This includes giving transportation to a family member "for essential health and safety activities and to obtain necessary supplies and services."

Q: What if I want to help my child move out of their college dorm?

A: That would seem to be all right, falling under a few different exceptions that allow for "caring for a family member" or "obtaining necessary supplies and services for family."

Q: What about transportation, like buses and light rail?

A: Public transportation may continue operating. The governor's executive order says people must limit the use of public transportation to circumstances when it is absolutely necessary to participate in an essential activity, like going to work or shopping for groceries. Even then, the order says, "riders shall maintain to the extent possible recommended physical distancing of at least six feet from other riders and the operator."

Q: Can I leave the house for a walk?

A: Yes, the governor's order allows for "engaging in outdoor exercise activities, such as walking, hiking, running, biking or golfing, but only if appropriate physical distancing practices are used."

Q: What if my business is not considered essential?

A: The governor's order says "non-essential businesses may continue to operate those activities that do not require in-person, on-site transactions." The order also encourages businesses to maintain at least basic operations. The governor's order also allows for working from home or operating single-owner businesses that do not have any face-to-face interaction.

Q: How does Arizona's order compare to other states?

A: At least 30 other states have adopted some sort of shelter in place or stay at home order. Many states have instituted tougher limits on which businesses and services can continue operating. California, Nevada, New Mexico and Colorado have already shuttered barbershops and salons, for example. But those services can continue operating in Arizona.

Q: Can cities enact tougher rules?

A: No. The governor's order says "no county, city or town may make or issue any order, rule or regulation" that conflicts with the order. That seems to limit cities and local governments from going any further. Flagstaff Mayor Coral Evans moved last week to close barbershops and beauty salons. State Sen. Vince Leach, R-Saddlebrooke, quickly accused her of acting illegally and threatened to file a complaint against her with the state attorney general.

Have questions about what the governor's stay at home order means? Email the reporter at andrew.oxford@gannett.com

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/arizona/2020/03/30/arizona-stay-home-order-what-means-coronavirus-outbreak-prevention/5091800002/