The spread of a highly contagious coronavirus has had wide-ranging global impacts, including in the financial markets and government travel policies.

As of April 18, the COVID-19 outbreak had infected more than 2.2 million people and killed more than 156,000 people globally, according to data collected by Johns Hopkins University.

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coverage of coronavirus health and safety free of charge on azcentral.com. Here are answers to some frequently asked questions: Ask us a new question here.

DIG DEEPER: Find more graphics on COVID-19 testing in Arizona

Arizona coronavirus update: Cases climb to more than 4,700, with 177 known deaths

April 18: Arizona reported eight more deaths from COVID-19 on Saturday, a day after a widely-respected model of the disease's progression predicted that the state had passed its likely peak in hospital resources and deaths.

Arizona's total identified cases rose to 4,719, with 177 known deaths, according to the most recent figures from the Arizona Department of Health Services. That's an increase of 212 confirmed cases, or 4.7%, since Friday, when the state reported 4,507 identified cases and 169 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 2,400, according to state numbers. All of Arizona's 15 counties have reported at least one case.

A model from the University of Washington's Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation that shows nationwide and international projections was updated Friday and shows a significantly different path for the disease in Arizona than earlier projections.

The institute's Arizona model estimates "peak resource" use was on April 10 — that means hospital beds, ICU beds and ventilators were at their greatest use that day. Based on projections, Arizona has enough beds to meet the continued demand. The earlier projection was April 30.

The projected peak in deaths per day was April 5, with 12 deaths that day, even though Arizona surpassed that number Friday. The earlier projection was May 2.

Latinos disproportionately dying, losing jobs because of coronavirus: 'We are strong people, but something has to change'

In a city where 16% of the population is Latino, physician Alicia Fernandez is alarmed by the overwhelming number of Latino patients she is seeing at Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital.

Fernandez blames the high cost of housing in the Bay Area, which finds many impoverished Latinos crowded into small apartments. “Sometimes it’s big families, but others it’s just a group of adults trying to make ends meet,” she says. “It makes it so hard to isolate and quarantine folks.”

In Nashville, school teacher Bobbi Negròn has been paying close attention to the havoc being wreaked on the lives of her fellow Latinos. When Negròn calls to see how some of her elementary school students are faring, parents sometimes ask her to stop phoning as they don’t have any minutes left on their cell plans.

In New York, a grim tally tells the tale: Latinos make up 29% of the population but are 39% of those who have succumbed to COVID-19, the respiratory illness causes by the virus.

Movie theaters would be among the first businesses to reopen after coronavirus under Trump plan

April 17: Break out the popcorn.

As the country takes the first baby steps back from the coronavirus shutdown, movie theaters could be one of the early beneficiaries.

Cinemas would be allowed to reopen in the first of three phases under the guidelines released Thursday by the White House.

Just when theaters, along with restaurants, sports stadiums and churches, will be allowed to welcome back the public under the Trump administration plan is yet to be seen. It will be left largely up to governors to decide when their states are ready to take the first step back to what was once considered normal.

President Donald Trump, in announcing the reopening at his daily news conference, said some are more ready than others. The plan didn't include a timetable.

4,507 confirmed cases, 169 known deaths as of Friday

April 17: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 4,500, with 169 known deaths, according to new numbers released Friday by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

Arizona's total identified cases rose to 4,507, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 273 confirmed cases, or 6.4%, since Thursday, when the state reported 4,234 identified cases and 150 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 2,400, according to state numbers. All of Arizona's 15 counties have reported at least one case.

More detailed data, including cases by ZIP code and race/ethnicity, was first released by the state Sunday and continues to be updated.

The number of Arizona cases likely is higher than official numbers suggest because of limits on supplies and available tests, which led to the state issuing guidelines that restrict who should be tested.

As of Friday morning, the state reported death totals from these counties: 69 in Maricopa, 51 in Pima, 24 in Coconino (county officials reported 26), 11 in Navajo, five in Pinal and four in Apache.

Mohave County reported two deaths, and Yavapai, Yuma and La Paz reported one each, as of Thursday. Information on deaths in those counties differed on the state site early Friday, showing fewer than three deaths for each of the four counties.

What is OSHA doing? Crisis raises questions about workplace safety agency

In South Dakota, the virus struck hundreds of workers at a single pork processing plant. In Illinois and Michigan, a half dozen grocery workers died and others fell ill. In New York, COVID-19 has claimed the lives of dozens of transit employees. Among health care workers, at least 27 have died and 9,200 have contracted the virus.

As the country contemplates returning more employees to work and reopening the economy, the key federal agency tasked with ensuring workplace safety is drawing withering criticism from advocates who say the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration is falling down on the job.

“OSHA has been totally absent from the response,” said David Michaels, an epidemiologist and public health professor at The George Washington University who oversaw the agency during the Obama administration from 2009 to 2017. “It is shocking and disheartening because OSHA should be out front leading the federal efforts to protect workers.”

Drinking alcohol may heighten risk of getting coronavirus, WHO suggests

As the coronavirus pandemic leaves millions stuck at home, alcohol sales have risen drastically nationwide, with spirits and premixed cocktails in high demand.

The World Health Organization, however, says alcohol may put people at increased risk for the coronavirus, weakening the body's immune system and leaving drinkers at risk for other risky behaviors that could increase the likelihood of contracting coronavirus.

It does work as a disinfectant on surfaces, but too much alcohol consumption can actually make the body less capable of handling the coronavirus. A 2015 study published in the journal Alcohol Research found that excessive alcohol consumption is associated with "adverse immune-related health effects such as susceptibility to pneumonia.”

4,234 confirmed cases, 150 known deaths as of Thursday

April 16: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 4,200, with 150 known deaths, according to new numbers released Thursday by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

Arizona's total identified cases rose to 4,234, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 272 confirmed cases, or 6.9%, since Wednesday, when the state reported 3,962 identified cases and 142 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 2,200. All of Arizona's 15 counties have reported at least one case.

More detailed data, including cases by ZIP code and race/ethnicity, was first released by the state Sunday and continues to be updated.

The number of Arizona cases likely is higher than official numbers suggest because of limits on supplies and available tests, which led to the state issuing guidelines that restrict who should be tested.

As of Thursday morning, the state reported death totals from these counties: 64 in Maricopa, 37 in Pima, 24 in Coconino (county officials reported 26), 11 in Navajo, five in Pinal and four in Apache.

Coronavirus, diabetes, obesity and other underlying conditions: Which patients are most at risk?

April 15: Though people of all ages are affected by coronavirus, many of those who develop severe complications after contracting it have preexisting medical conditions. According to a CDC report, nearly 90% of adult patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in the US had one or more underlying diseases.

The most common were hypertension (49.7%), obesity (48.3%), chronic lung disease (34.6%), diabetes (28.3%), and cardiovascular disease (27.8%). These conditions were even more prevalent in deceased COVID-19 patients, according to data released by Louisiana, New York and New Jersey.

Was your Arizona unemployment claim rejected? Hold tight — the state is re-evaluating thousands of applications

April 15: Have you applied for jobless benefits in the past several weeks and been denied? You still might get some help, according to the Arizona Department of Economic Security.

The state is re-evaluating what likely are thousands of applications from the past two months to see if they should qualify under more generous federal guidelines passed by Congress, which include an additional $600 a week in benefits on top of the $240 maximum offered by the state for some people.

Congress passed, and President Trump signed, the CARES Act on March 27. It expands jobless benefits to nearly everyone put out of work, including part-time workers, contractors and the self-employed. Gov. Doug Ducey also expanded eligibility benefits by waiving the usual one-week waiting period and requirement that people getting jobless benefits continue to look for work.

Many people who have lost their jobs or had their hours reduced because of the national effort to prevent spreading coronavirus, were rejected by the Arizona Department of Economic Security.

Many people are denied because they don't have sufficient earnings history to qualify for state benefits.

But the changes from Congress allow people in that situation, including contractors, part-timers and the self-employed, to get paid.

"DES will review all applications that have been determined 'monetarily ineligible,' since Feb. 2 to determine eligibility for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance," said Brett Bezio, deputy press secretary for DES.

He could not say how many applications needed to be reviewed, but the department has seen a historic number of first-time applications in the past four weeks, with 345,800 people seeking benefits.

3,962 confirmed cases, 142 known deaths as of Wednesday

April 15: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now approach 4,000, with 142 known deaths, according to new numbers released on Wednesday by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

Arizona's total identified cases rose to 3,962, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 156 confirmed cases, or 4%, since Tuesday when the state reported 3,806 identified cases and 131 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 2,100. All of Arizona's 15 counties have reported at least one case.

More detailed data, including cases by ZIP code and race/ethnicity, was released by the state on Sunday.

The number of Arizona cases likely is higher than official numbers suggest because of limits on supplies and available tests, which led to the state issuing guidelines that restrict who should be tested.

As of Wednesday morning, the state reported death totals from the following counties: 60 in Maricopa, 34 in Pima, 24 in Coconino, 10 in Navajo, five in Pinal and four in Apache.

Trump announces 'halt' in US funding to World Health Organization

President Donald Trump said Tuesday his administration will "halt" U.S. funding to the World Health Organization as it conducts a review of the global organization's handling of the coronavirus pandemic.

"The reality is that the WHO failed to adequately obtain, vet and share information in a timely and transparent fashion," the president said in a Rose Garden press conference.

Trump has accused the organization of not moving quickly enough to sound the alarm over COVID-19 and of being too China friendly. He has attacked the agency for advising the U.S. against banning travel from China to other parts of the world amid the outbreak.

"And the World — WHO — World Health got it wrong," the president told reporters at the White House last week. "I mean, they got it very wrong. In many ways, they were wrong. They also minimized the threat very strongly and — not good."

Gov. Ducey to hold press conference at 2:30 p.m.

How to track your stimulus check

April 14: Slowly but surely, taxpayers are telling their friends, and yes, posting news on social media, that they're already seeing stimulus cash arrive in their bank accounts.

And the Internal Revenue Service is expected to give you a new online tool as soon as Wednesday to get a better clue on when you'll see your Economic Impact Payment via IRS.gov/eip. The IRS said the tool will let you go online to check the status of a payment, including the date it's scheduled to be deposited or mailed.

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said in a press briefing Monday that Treasury is ahead of schedule in getting the money out and expects that more than 80 million people will receive their stimulus money by Wednesday.

The U.S. Department of Treasury expects that a "large majority of eligible Americans will receive Economic Impact Payments within the next two weeks."

3,806 confirmed cases, 131 known deaths as of Tuesday

April 14: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 3,800, with 131 known deaths, according to new numbers released on Tuesday by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

Arizona's total identified cases rose to 3,806, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 104 confirmed cases, or 2.8%, since Monday when the state reported 3,702 identified cases and 122 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 2,000. All of Arizona's 15 counties have reported at least one case.

More detailed data, including cases by ZIP code and race/ethnicity, was released by the state on Sunday.

The number of Arizona cases likely is higher than official numbers suggest because of limits on supplies and available tests, which led to the state issuing guidelines that restrict who should be tested.

President Trump retweets a call for Dr. Anthony Fauci's dismissal

April 13: President Donald Trump generated new questions about the fate of his anti-coronavirus policy team by retweeting a post that called for firing Anthony Fauci.

Trump did not explicitly endorse the call to remove Fauci in his Sunday tweet, but in recirculating it, he defended himself against claims he did not act quickly enough to curb the spread of the virus that has killed thousands and led to a near-shutdown of the American economy.

DeAnna Lorraine, a pro-Trump congressional candidate who polled less than 2% in a recent open primary challenge to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., claimed in a tweet that "Fauci is now saying that had Trump listened to the medical experts earlier he could've saved more lives. Fauci was telling people on February 29th that there was nothing to worry about and it posed no threat to the US public at large."

She added: "Time to #FireFauci..."

Trump and Fauci, the long-time director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, have disputed each other during the course of the epidemic.

3,702 confirmed cases, 122 known deaths as of Monday

April 13: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 3,700, with 122 known deaths, according to new numbers released Monday by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

Arizona's total identified cases rose to 3,702, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 163 confirmed cases, or 4.6%, since Sunday when the state reported 3,539 identified cases and 115 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 2,000. All of Arizona's 15 counties have reported at least one case.

More detailed data, including cases by ZIP code and race/ethnicity, was released by the state at noon Sunday.

The number of Arizona cases likely is higher than official numbers suggest because of limits on supplies and available tests, which led to the state issuing guidelines that restrict who should be tested.

As of Monday morning, the state reported death totals from the following counties: 52 in Maricopa, 29 in Pima, 21 in Coconino, eight in Navajo, four in Pinal and four in Apache.

Coronavirus by ZIP code: New data shows where cases are found across Arizona

April 12: Arizona health officials for the first time released coronavirus data by ZIP code on Sunday. The data showed hot spots of infections near Indian reservations, especially around Page, along with large numbers of cases in Scottsdale and Tucson.

Yet the state excluded much of the information needed to identify locations of outbreaks in the state.

The state Department of Health Services published its data as a map, showing a number of cases for each ZIP code. ZIP codes with more than 10 cases gave a specific number. Those with fewer gave ranges: "0," "1-5" or "6-10."

The team from AZ Data Central extracted the case figures from the state's map, assembling many of the data points by hand.

The state's map shows every ZIP code with more than 10 cases as red.

To give a truer view of the pandemic's impact in Arizona, AZ Data Central's map presents the number as of Sunday relative to the population of each ZIP code.

As states restrict Easter gatherings, churches and lawmakers push back

April 12: In Kansas, that battle has reached the Supreme Court. Democratic Gov. Laura Kelly filed a lawsuit Thursday after a Republican-dominated legislative panel overturned her executive order banning religious and funeral services of more than 10 attendees during the coronavirus pandemic.

Republican Senate President Susan Wagle painted the executive order as an attack on Christians. "Now, during Holy Week for Christians, she is closing our churches," Wagle said on Twitter. "We are doing our part to slow the spread."

US now has more COVID-19 deaths than any other country

April 11: The United States has passed Italy to become the country with the most coronavirus deaths. However, as a proportion of the total population in the U.S., virus deaths remain at about one-sixth of those in hard-hit Italy or Spain.

More than 19,700 people in the U.S. have died due to complications from the coronavirus as of Saturday afternoon, according to data from the Johns Hopkins University dashboard. Friday, the U.S. saw its highest daily death count yet, at 2,108.

Italy's death toll was at 19,468 and Spain, the nation with the third-most fatalities, had 16,353 reported deaths. Worldwide, the death count has surpassed 104,000.

Estimates on how many people will end up dying in the U.S. have fluctuated in recent weeks as new data continues to pour in.

A leading projection model from the University of Washington has forecast about 60,000 deaths in the country, far less than the 100,000 to 240,000 deaths that were projected in a White House release less than two weeks ago.

3,393 confirmed cases, 108 known deaths as of Saturday

April 11: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 3,300, with 108 known deaths, according to new numbers released Saturday by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

Arizona's total identified cases rose to 3,393, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 281 confirmed cases, or 9%, since Friday when the state reported 3,112 identified cases and 97 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 1,800. All of Arizona's 15 counties have reported at least one case.

The number of Arizona cases likely is higher than official numbers suggest because of limits on supplies and available tests, which led to the state issuing guidelines that restrict who should be tested.

As of Saturday morning, the state reported death totals from the following counties: 47 in Maricopa, 29 in Pima, 15 in Coconino, seven in Navajo and three each in Pinal and Apache. Mohave County reported two deaths and Yavapai and La Paz reported one each, though those did not appear on the state's dashboard.

100 more ventilators on their way to Arizona

April 10: Gov. Doug Ducey today said 100 additional ventilators will be sent to Arizona from the Strategic National Stockpile, at the request of Ducey and U.S. Sen. Martha McSally.

"These ventilators will add to our surge capacity and help us prepare in our tribal communities and elsewhere," Ducey said in a statement. "President Trump and I spoke about this Wednesday night. I’m grateful that he was able to deliver on this request immediately."

Ducey said he had been in touch with Navajo President Jonathan Nez and Vice President Myron Lizer about the Navajo Nation's needs for supplies, personnel and ventilators to fight COVID-19.

"Our goal is that we will never need these ventilators and can eventually send them to other regions of the country, but this action by President Trump and Vice President Pence will help ensure Arizona is prepared for a worst-case scenario,” Ducey said.

McSally said in her statement, “This is potentially life-saving news for Arizona.”

Looking for Lysol spray and Clorox wipes? Here’s when you can buy again

April 10: As the coronavirus locks down more of the country, shelf after shelf of Lysol sprays and Clorox wipes has been picked clean by shoppers preparing for the possibility that they could be quarantined for weeks or months.

Store limits on disinfecting wipes and sprays haven’t slowed the fear-fueled run as households stock up on cleaning products to protect against infection. Neither have eye-popping prices online and off.

In March, sales of aerosol disinfectants jumped 343% and multipurpose cleaners 166% from a year ago, according to research firm Nielsen. And still, people are scouring the internet's vast virtual shelves and local stores for more.

How could something so basic suddenly be so hard to get?

Manufacturers like Clorox were not prepared for skyrocketing demand in a sleepy sector with reliably steady sales that usually only fluctuate during flu season. And, with global supply chains snarled by the coronavirus, they now can’t produce enough inventory to meet that demand, supply chain experts say.

Clorox 4-in-1 Disinfecting Spray and Lysol Disinfectant Spray are among the products that the Environmental Protection Agency says likely protect against the spread of the coronavirus.

“Nobody ever expected this to happen, and they got caught flatfooted,” says Patrick Penfield, professor of supply chain practice at Syracuse University. “They don’t have enough ingredients. They don’t have enough capacity.”

Disinfectant products manufacturers say they are rushing to churn out as much as they can as quickly as they can.

By mid-May, supply chains should return to normal and by June, out-of-stock disinfectants should begin reappearing on store shelves, predicts Tom Derry, CEO of the Institute for Supply Management. But intermittent shortages could persist for months, such as in the fall when people are expected to return to work and children to school.

Coronavirus antibody testing: What is it? Can it reopen US economy?

April 10: As officials begin to discuss when they can lift stay-at-home orders, companies are rushing to develop coronavirus antibody tests that could help them make those decisions without risking a second wave of infections.

Leading the fight against COVID-19, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said Friday morning on CNN that antibody testing can show who has developed immunity to the coronavirus and can safely go back to work without getting reinfected.

“As we get to the point of at least considering opening up the country, as it were, it’s very important to appreciate and understand how much this virus is penetrating this society,” he said.

How would antibody tests factor into decisions to lift social distancing orders, and how reliable are those tests? Here's everything you need to know about antibody testing.

World reaches 100,000 deaths; US has 'not reached the peak'

April 10: Dr. Deborah Birx, coordinator of the White House coronavirus task force, said Friday that the U.S. has not "reached the peak" of the pandemic but that there were "encouraging" signs that the curves were flattening or lowering.

"This is not the time to feel that since we have made such important advances ... that we need to be pulling back at all," Dr. Anthony Fauci added at the Friday press briefing.

Meanwhile, a leading projection of the pandemic had U.S. deaths from the virus at its peak Friday as the global death toll reached 100,000 lives. Research from the University of Washington in Seattle, which has created some of the preeminent modeling of the pandemic, indicated U.S. deaths could reach almost 2,000 on Friday but would fall in the coming days.

Elsewhere, travelers were being cautioned to stay home around the world to mark the traditions of Good Friday and the Easter weekend. Eagerly awaited stimulus checks should soon be hitting Americans' bank accounts. And New York now ha has more confirmed coronavirus cases than any other country in the world.

The U.S. surpassed 475,000 confirmed cases on Friday, according to the Johns Hopkins University data dashboard. About 26,000 Americans have recovered.

3,112 confirmed cases, 97 known deaths as of Friday

April 10: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 3,100, with 97 known deaths, according to new numbers released Friday by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

Arizona's total identified cases rose to 3,112, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 94 confirmed cases, or 3%, since Thursday when the state reported 3,018 identified cases and 89 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 1,700. All of Arizona's 15 counties have reported at least one case.

The number of Arizona cases likely is higher than official numbers suggest because of limits on supplies and available tests, which led to the state issuing guidelines that restrict who should be tested.

Iceland tested 10% of its population for COVID-19. Here's what it learned

April 10: By Friday, Iceland will have achieved something no other country has: tested 10% of its population for coronavirus, a figure far higher than anywhere else in the world.

No country or scientist or doctor has all the answers about the pandemic that has swept the globe, infecting more than 1.6 million people and killing at least 95,000.

But some places, such as tiny Iceland, Europe's most sparsely populated country – pop. 364,134, broadly equivalent to the number of people in Tulsa, Oklahoma – may be better placed to deliver some types of coronavirus information, and even answers, than most, at least in the short term, according to public health experts, international government officials and others involved in responding to the outbreak.

Stimulus checks on the way

April 9: U.S. stocks surged higher despite mind-numbing jobless numbers while some Americans could begin receiving stimulus checks Thursday.

Some of President Donald Trump's Cabinet signaled frustration with lockdowns and stay-at-home orders: Attorney General William Barr called restrictions in many states "draconian;" Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said parts of the economy could reopen by May.

The Dow was up more than 300 points. The Labor Department reported a staggering 6.6 million initial claims for unemployment insurance. And the saddest numbers: The U.S. death toll from the pandemic rocking the globe was nearing 15,000; there are now more than 432,000 confirmed cases, according to the Johns Hopkins University data dashboard.

There was a silver lining: A University of Washington health research center dropped its estimated U.S. death total from the coronavirus, placing the likely toll by August at about 60,000. Worldwide, there are more than 1.5 million confirmed cases and more than 90,000 deaths. And the nation's top health expert said he's optimistic of a turnaround.

Fauci lowers U.S. coronavirus death forecast to 60,000

April 9: Senior White House adviser Anthony Fauci said Thursday the death toll from the coronavirus could be closer to 60,000 Americans, assuming full social distancing, rather than the previously projected 100,000 to 240,000 deaths.

"The real data are telling us that it is highly likely that we're having a definite positive effect by these mitigation things that we're doing — this physical separation — so I believe we are gonna see a downturn in that,” Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told NBC's Today show.

“And it looks more like the 60,000 than the 100,000 to 200,000,” he said.

Fauci did not say which model he is using to come up with the estimate, but his comments came as a leading model from the University of Washington that experts in the White House have been using also predicted fewer Americans may die from coronavirus than previously thought.

That model now projects 60,415 people will die in the U.S. by Aug. 4, compared to previous projections that approached 100,000. Forty-five states and the District of Columbia will have fewer deaths than previously thought, under the model.

3,018 confirmed cases, 89 known deaths as of Thursday

April 9: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 3,000, with 89 known deaths, according to new numbers released Thursday by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

The total identified cases in Arizona are 3,018, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 292 confirmed cases, or 11%, since Wednesday when the state reported 2,726 identified cases and 80 deaths. That's a higher daily percent increase than recent days.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now approach 1,700. All of Arizona's 15 counties have at least one recorded case.

The number of Arizona cases likely is much higher than official numbers suggest. People have reported trouble getting tested, as health professionals confront confusion over who to test and face a lack of testing supplies.

As of Thursday morning, Maricopa County recorded 39 deaths related to COVID-19. Pima County had 16 known deaths, Coconino had 15, Pinal and Mohave counties each had two deaths, and Navajo County reported one death, according to the respective county websites.

Almost all federal stockpile of personal protective equipment is depleted

Ninety percent of the federal personal protective equipment stockpile had been depleted as the Health and Human Services Department made its "final shipments" of N95 respirators, surgical and face masks, face shields, gowns and gloves, according to new documents released Wednesday by the House Oversight Committee

The remaining 10% of the stockpile, HHS said, would be reserved for federal workers and would not be sent to the states.

The documents, which report the distribution of personal protective equipment to state and local governments as of April 6, show that only 11.7 million N95 respirator masks and 7,920 ventilators have been distributed across the nation — both amounts small fractions of the estimated amount of protective equipment needed by frontline medical workers.

HHS confirmed to the Associated Press on Wednesday that the remaining equipment in the federal stockpile was in the process of being deployed.

More checks? Hazard pay? What might be in next stimulus bill

April 8: Americans have yet to receive their $1,200 stimulus checks from the federal government, but another round of cash payments could be coming their way.

Talks are under way between the Trump administration and Congress on another recovery package to blunt the economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic. A second round of cash payments to Americans is part of the discussions.

“We could very well do a second round,” President Donald Trump said at a White House news conference on Monday. “It is absolutely under serious consideration.”

Congress already has approved three stimulus bills to juice the economy amid the coronavirus crisis. The largest is a $2.2 trillion economic recovery package that provides one-time payments of up to $1,200 to millions of Americans, as well as loans, grants and tax breaks for businesses reeling from the economic fallout caused by the pandemic.

2,726 confirmed cases, 80 known deaths as of Wednesday

April 8: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 2,700, with 80 known deaths, according to new numbers released Wednesday by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

The total identified cases in Arizona are 2,726, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 151 confirmed cases, or 6%, since Tuesday when the state reported 2,575 identified cases and 73 deaths. This is a lower percentage increase in cases than in previous days.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now approach 1,600. All of Arizona's 15 counties have at least one recorded case.

The number of Arizona cases is likely much higher than official numbers suggest. People have reported trouble getting tested, as health professionals confront confusion over who to test and face a lack of testing supplies.

As of Wednesday morning, Maricopa County recorded 37 deaths related to COVID-19. Pima County had 15 known deaths and Coconino had 14, according to the respective county websites. Navajo County and Mohave County each reported one death, both people in their 60s with underlying health conditions.

Gov. Ducey to hold press conference at 2 p.m.

April 7: Gov. Doug Ducey will join Department of Health Services Director Dr. Cara Chris and others to provide an update on COVID-19 in Arizona and the state’s latest actions.

New data on New York coronavirus deaths: Most had these underlying illnesses

April 7: The majority of New York’s more than 4,700 deaths due to coronavirus were among men, and 86% of all deaths were among people who had underlying illnesses, such as hypertension and diabetes, new state data shows.

The statistics released late Monday offered the latest glimpse into how the rapidly spreading virus has impacted New York and made it the epicenter for COVID-19 in the nation.

Of the 4,758 deaths in New York since the first on March 14, 61% were men and 39% were women, the state Department of Health reported on its new data portal.

In addition, 63% of the deaths were among those age 70 and older, while 7% of the cases were those 49 and younger.

And 4,089 of those who died had at least one other chronic disease, the records showed:

The leading underlying illness was hypertension, which showed up in 55% of the deaths.

Next was diabetes, which was diagnosed in 1,755 deaths, or about 37% of the cases.

Other top illnesses found in those who died from coronavirus were hyperlipidemia; coronary artery disease; renal disease and dementia.

2,575 confirmed cases, 73 known deaths as of Tuesday

April 7: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 2,500, with 73 known deaths, according to new numbers released by the Arizona Department of Health Services on Tuesday.

The total identified cases in Arizona are 2,575, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 119 confirmed cases, or 5%, since Monday when the state reported 2,456 identified cases and 65 deaths. This is a lower percentage increase in cases than in previous days.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now approach 1,500. All of Arizona's 15 counties have at least one recorded case.

The number of Arizona cases is likely much higher than official numbers suggest. People have reported trouble getting tested, as health professionals confront confusion over who to test and face a lack of testing supplies.

British Prime Minister Boris Johnson moved to intensive care as coronavirus symptoms worsen

APRIL 6: British Prime Minister Boris Johnson was moved to an intensive care unit at a London hospital Monday night after his coronavirus symptoms worsened, his office said in a statement.

Johnson, 55, asked Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab "to deputize for him where necessary," according to a Downing Street statement.

"Since Sunday evening, the prime minister has been under the care of doctors at St. Thomas' Hospital, in London, after being admitted with persistent symptoms of coronavirus," the statement said.

Johnson tested positive for the respiratory illness March 17, the first major world leader to publicly acknowledge having COVID-19. His symptoms include a high temperature and a cough. He is conscious and has not been put on a ventilator.

Earlier Monday, Johnson tweeted that he had a "comfortable night" and was in "good spirits" while receiving regular briefings from his Cabinet and government advisers.

Johnson's illness means that he has had to effectively step away from day-to-day governing as Britain, like much of the world, faces the worst public health crisis in a century. Britain has more than 52,000 confirmed cases and more than 5,300 deaths, and the virus could reach its peak in the country as soon as this weekend.

Cuomo: Deaths, hospitalizations may be leveling off in New York

April 6: The number of daily COVID-19 hospitalizations in New York state declined again and deaths may be leveling off, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Monday. Cuomo also said he would ask President Donald Trump for permission to use the 1,000-bed USNS Comfort for COVID-19 patients since there is little demand for beds for other illnesses. The Comfort anchored in New York's harbor with a mission to treat non-virus patients so hospitals could concentrate on COVID patients.

Cuomo also said demand for hospital beds and ventilators may not reach numbers previously projected if residents continue to follow social distancing and other guidelines. But he also announced an increase in the fine, to $1,000 from $500, for failing to follow the rules.

"There is a real danger in getting overconfident," Cuomo said at his daily news conference. "This is an enemy that we have underestimated from day one and we have paid the price dearly."

US stocks race higher

April 6: U.S. stocks rose sharply Monday: The Dow Jones Industrial Average and the S&P 500 were up more than 5% in early afternoon trading on signs of a slowdown in coronavirus deaths and new cases in some of the hardest-hit areas around the globe.

Global shares also rose Monday as investors saw hopeful signs the coronavirus pandemic may be leveling off in hard-hit places such as Italy, Spain – and even New York. Benchmarks were up about 3% in Paris and Frankfurt and Tokyo jumped more than 4%.

"In the near term, we believe market performance primarily depends on how quickly economic activity can normalize following measures to contain the virus,” Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management, said in a note.

2,456 confirmed cases, 65 known deaths as of Monday

April 6: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 2,400, with 65 known deaths, according to new numbers released by the Arizona Department of Health Services on Monday.

The total identified cases in Arizona are 2,456, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 187 confirmed cases, or 8%, since Sunday when the state reported 2,269 identified cases and 64 deaths. This is a lower percentage increase in cases than in previous days.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 1,400. All of Arizona's 15 counties have at least one recorded case.

Trump interrupts when reporter asks Fauci about hydroxychloroquine

April 5: A reporter's question about hydroxychloroquine led to a testy moment at Sunday's White House briefing.

Anthony Fauci was asked his thoughts on the effectiveness of the anti-malaria drug in treating coronavirus patients, and President Donald Trump interrupted before the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases could answer.

“He’s answered that question 15 times,” said Trump, who had spent much of the news conference touting the drug's potential.

Arizona reports 2,269 coronavirus cases and 64 known deaths

April 5: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 2,200, with 64 known deaths, according to new numbers released by the Arizona Department of Health Services on Sunday.

The total identified cases in Arizona are 2,269, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 250 confirmed cases, or 12%, since Saturday when the state reported 2,019 identified cases and 52 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 1,300. All of Arizona's 15 counties have at least one recorded case.

Governors warn of dire ventilator shortages. Trump says some are playing 'politics'

April 5: Governors' warnings of life-threatening shortages of ventilators have emerged as a flashpoint between President Donald Trump and the states as the coronavirus crisis deepens.

"Some states have more ventilators than they need," Trump told a news briefing Saturday. "They don't even like to admit it. They'll admit it when everything's over but that doesn't help us very much.“

Governors in hard-hit states like New York, Michigan and Louisiana say doctors could be forced to make life or death decisions about who will get ventilators and who won't if hospitals starting running out of the machines when the peak of the crisis hits.

Trump says US to deploy 1,000 military personnel to New York City

April 4: President Donald Trump said Saturday he is deploying 1,000 medical personnel to New York City to help battle the coronavirus.

Personnel to be deployed will include doctors, nurses, respiratory specialists and others, Trump announced at a White House news briefing on Saturday.

“We've been doing it, but now we're doing it on a larger basis,” Trump said.

Trump did not say from which branches of the services the officials will be deployed. But he said they will be sent Sunday and Monday to New York, “where they’re needed most.”

IRS's antiquated technology could delay $1,200 coronavirus stimulus checks

April 4: WASHINGTON – Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin is promising that millions of Americans will receive $1,200 stimulus checks in just two weeks, but some tax experts and congressional officials are warning it may take much longer.

Antiquated technology and staff reductions at the Internal Revenue Service have seriously hampered the agency’s ability to process checks in such a short period and could mean delays in sending the money to anxious Americans who are counting on the cash to get them through hard times caused by the coronavirus pandemic, experts say.

“There are going to be a lot of people for whom this is going to take a while, and I think it’s going to be measured in terms of months, not weeks,” said Howard Gleckman, a senior fellow at the Urban Institute's Tax Policy Center.

2,019 cases and 52 known deaths

April 4: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 2,000, with 52 known deaths, according to new numbers released by the Arizona Department of Health Services on Saturday.

The total identified cases in Arizona are 2,019 according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 250 confirmed cases, or 14%, since Friday when the state reported 1,769 identified cases and 41 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 1,100. All of Arizona's 15 counties have at least one recorded case.

Trump: CDC recommending voluntary use of face masks for public

April 3: The Trump administration is advising people to start wearing face masks in public to stop the disease's spread, a reversal on previous guidance that urged people not to wear masks.

President Donald Trump said at a White House news conference Friday that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines are strictly voluntary. “You can do it – you don’t have to do it. It’s only a recommendation.”

Trump repeatedly stressed it is voluntary. "I don't think i'm going to be doing it," he said.

Trump stressed that the CDC is not calling for Americans wear medical-grade masks. Medical protective gear must be preserved for health care officials who are on the front lines treating coronavirus patients, he said.

Hair and nail salons must close, Ducey says

April 3: Any Arizona hair and nail salons that haven't already shut down to slow the spread of COVID-19 will have to close by 5 p.m. Saturday, according to new guidance issued by Gov. Doug Ducey's office.

The nature of such businesses means they cannot maintain required social distancing guidelines of at least six feet between individuals, his office said.

The directive also applies to:

Barbershops

Tanning salons

Spas

Massage parlors

Tattoo parlors

Basketball courts, splash pads, playgrounds and public restrooms at public parks

"Communal pools' at hotels, condominiums, apartment complexes and parks

Swap meets

Trump criticizes mask maker 3M

April 3: President Donald Trump is criticizing 3M over N95 respirator masks as the company revealed demand is "much higher" than its ability to make them during the coronavirus pandemic.

In a tweet, Trump said 3M "will have a big price to pay" over mask production.

"We hit 3M hard today after seeing what they were doing with their Masks," Trump wrote. "'P Act' all the way. Big surprise to many in government as to what they were doing."

On Thursday, the White House invoked the Defense Production Act to acquire more masks with N95 respirators from 3M.

1,769 cases and 41 known deaths

April 3: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 1,700, with 41 known deaths, according to new numbers released by the Arizona Department of Health Services on Friday.

The total identified cases in Arizona is 1,769, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 171 confirmed cases, or 11%, since Thursday when the state reported 1,598 identified cases and 32 deaths.

Maricopa County's confirmed cases now exceed 1,000. All of Arizona's 15 counties have at least one recorded case.

Ducey shifts tone on salons

April 2: Gov. Doug Ducey walked back his controversial decision to allow Arizona's salons to stay open during the COVID-19 pandemic, claiming his executive order outlining "essential services" did not include them.

"The businesses you're talking about are not covered," he told moderator Ted Simons during a town hall broadcast live throughout the state.

"If they're looking for cover under one of the categories, then they're going to have to be able to demonstrate that they can exercise social distancing or some other type of protective (measures)."

Target to limit number of shoppers in stores as a new safety measure

April 2: Target announced Thursday that it is adding new measures to promote safety and social distancing to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.

The Minneapolis-based retailer said in a news release that beginning Saturday, April 4, it "will actively monitor and, when needed, meter guest traffic in its nearly 1,900 stores nationwide to promote social distancing."

Occupancy limits will vary by store and based on a specific location's square footage "to enhance the average space per person and reduce the possibility of congestion," Target said.

If a store needs to limit shoppers, there will be a "designated waiting area outside with social distancing markers."

Arizona coronavirus update: Nearly 1,600 identified cases and 32 known deaths

April 2: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now approach 1,600, with 32 known deaths, according to new numbers released by the Arizona Department of Health Services on Thursday.

The total number of identified cases in Arizona is 1,598, according to the most recent state figures. That's an increase of 185 confirmed cases, or 13%, since Wednesday when the state reported 1,413 identified cases and 29 deaths.

All of Arizona's 15 counties have at least one recorded case.

What if I can't pay my rent? Help for Arizona renters struggling during COVID-19 pandemic

April 2: Rent is due for most metro Phoenix renters at the first of the month, but a growing number likely is struggling to pay due to the health and economic fallout from COVID-19.

A record number of Arizonans have applied for unemployment benefits as businesses have shuttered or scaled back operations to slow the spread of the new coronavirus.

If you are a struggling renter, help is available in a few ways.

You're feeling sick. Here's the latest on COVID-19 testing options in Arizona

April 2: As the new coronavirus spreads in Arizona, more and more people may get fevers, coughs and shortness of breath — the hallmark symptoms of COVID-19.

But many Arizonans will never know whether or not they had the virus.

A variety of laboratories, clinics and even telemedicine groups have started offering tests in Arizona, but guidelines are strict for who gets a test. For the most part, unless you’re very sick and present multiple symptoms or known exposure, it may be difficult to get tested.

ASU researchers look for traces of COVID-19 in Tempe's sewage, which could serve as early warning system

April 2:Arizona State University researchers in Tempe are looking for traces of COVID-19 in wastewater, which could serve as an early warning system of the virus’s spread in communities.

Tempe officials said more data on how widespread the virus is in the city could help staff better deploy protective equipment and other resources, access testing kits and better prepare first responders and health care workers to handle the outbreak, said Rosa Inchausti, director of Tempe’s Strategic Management and Diversity Office.

“Now we wake up and instead of checking the weather every day we look for two numbers, how many people are infected and how many people have died. But you don’t know anything about the people who are asymptomatic or who haven’t been tested,” Inchausti said. “That’s just not enough information for public officials to be making decisions.”

Jobless claims soar; 10% unemployment ahead?

April 2: The number of Americans who filed claims for unemployment benefits surged to a record 6.6 million last week as the coronavirus pandemic continued to spark massive layoffs and furloughs across the nation. The 6.6 million jobless claims reported by the Labor Department on Thursday was double the prior week’s record-smashing total of nearly 3.3 million. U.S. stocks, hammered by steep declines Wednesday, were modestly higher in early trading Thursday.

“Sadly we’re only at the start of this process,” said James McCann, senior global economist at Aberdeen Standard Investments. "When we look at all the jobs at direct risk from social distancing policies, and those which could be affected indirectly, the numbers start to get pretty scary."

Text with our coronavirus team Sign up with your cellphone number below, and we'll send you text updates on the coronavirus in Arizona. You can also text us story ideas and questions. We promise not to use your number for anything else.



More than 1,000 in US die in a single day from coronavirus

April 1: The U.S. topped 1,000 coronavirus deaths in a single day for the first time Wednesday, a daily death toll more than double that of two of America's most deadly illnesses — lung cancer and the flu.

Death counts from the virus are difficult to keep up to date in the daily chaos from the virus, but the Johns Hopkins coronavirus database — whose sources include the World Health Organization, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the European CDC and the National Health Commission of China — shows that the U.S. hit 1,040 cases Wednesday at 10:25 p.m. ET.

The previous high mark for a single day in the U.S. was Tuesday, with 504 deaths.

Costco to limit how many people per membership can enter clubs

April 1: Costco will limit how many people can enter its warehouse clubs as part of its response to the coronavirus.

Starting Friday, April 3, the retail giant will allow no more than two people to enter stores with each membership card.

Earlier this week, Costco cut its weekday hours because of the pandemic. Stores now close at 6:30 p.m. Monday through Friday and gas stations at U.S. locations will be open at 7:30 a.m. daily and close at 7 p.m. weekdays and at 6:30 p.m. weekends.

Costco also is now offering three senior shopping hours a week and is allowing “those with physical impairments” to participate.

The senior hours originally started March 24 as a twice-weekly event for members 60 and up on Tuesdays and Thursdays, but Costco added Wednesdays as the third day effective April 1.

Arizona's case count rises by 10%

April 1: Arizona cases of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, now exceed 1,400, with 29 known deaths, according to new numbers posted by the Arizona Department of Health Services.

The number of identified cases in Arizona was 1,413, according to the most recent state figures. All of Arizona's 15 counties have at least one recorded case.

That's an increase of 124 confirmed cases, or 10%, since Tuesday.

As of Wednesday morning, Maricopa County recorded 11 deaths related to COVID-19. Pima County had eight deaths and Coconino County four, according to their respective websites. Navajo County had one reported death, that of an individual in their 60s with underlying health conditions, according to the county.

Unemployment checks going out soon

April 1: Help is on the way for the record-shattering number of people seeking jobless benefits, which are set to increase by $600 a week.

Tens of thousands of Arizonans have applied for benefits in the past two weeks as businesses have closed or significantly reduced operations.

The state Department of Economic Security is responsible for reviewing and approving applications for people to get paid when they are let go from their jobs. The criteria for receiving benefits was expanded first by Gov. Doug Ducey in an executive order, and then again by Congress and President Trump last week.

The most significant change is a potential $600 a week in additional benefits for time away from work from March 29 through July 31. That's in addition to Arizona's cap of $240.

Sunlight does not kill the new coronavirus

April 1: An article on a holistic health blog that has been circulating on Facebook tells people to go outside to prevent catching the new coronavirus because sunlight kills it.

“In my opinion, keeping the beaches closed and having people quarantined inside their homes is a bad decision. Getting more sunshine is a proactive step we can all take at protecting ourselves from the current coronavirus outbreak,” wrote David Friedman, the author of the blog post.

The claim has been shared widely on the internet and appeared in a COVID-19 video by Rep. Greg Murphy, R-N.C., who is a physician.

But it holds little truth. according to experts. Experts have advised against using concentrated UV light to prevent or treat the coronavirus and do not recommend going in the sunlight to kill the virus.

Read a full fact check of the claim, and learn why powerful UV light should be avoided.

These companies are still hiring in Arizona

April 1: As companies are laying off or furloughing employees and Arizona sees a record number of jobless claims, some companies in the state are still hiring.

These companies in Arizona have said they are hiring during the coronavirus outbreak. The industries include:

Grocers and retailers

Food and drink suppliers

First responders

Health care

Security companies

Education and tech services

Call centers

Industrial protection

Additionally, Arizona At Work has a list of all job opportunities available across the state. For help finding a job or building a resume, visit azjobconnection.gov.

Ducey's stay-at-home order: What it means

Gov. Doug Ducey on March 30 issued a statewide "stay-at-home" order to slow the spread of the new coronavirus, preventing Arizonans from leaving their residences except for food, medicine and other "essential activities." Here's what it means for you.

According to the governor, essential services include:

Health care and public health operations.

Services for elderly people, those with developmental disabilities, foster and adoption children and individuals experiencing homelessness.

Infrastructure operation, such as food production, utility operators, construction and internet providers.

First responders and other emergency personnel.

Grocery stores and pharmacies.

Veterinary care.

Outdoor recreation.

Charities and social service organizations, including nonprofits and food banks.

Media organizations.

Gas stations and other transportation-related businesses.

Banks and credit unions.

Hardware and supply stores.

"Critical trades," such as plumbers, electricians, cleaning, sanitation and security.

Shipping and mail services.

Educational institutions.

Laundry services.

Restaurants, for takeout and delivery.

Suppliers for essential businesses.

Distributors that enable telework.

Airlines, taxis and ride-sharing services.

Residential facilities and shelters.

Legal, real estate and accounting services.

Day-care centers for employees of essential businesses.

Manufacturers and distributors of "critical products."

Hotels.

Funeral services.

PREVIOUSLY: Arizona coronavirus updates from March 2020

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-health/2020/04/01/coronavirus-arizona-updates-map-updates-new-cases/5100603002/