Who’s most at risk?

The people most vulnerable to severe illness from the novel coronavirus include older persons and those with chronic medical conditions — conditions that are disproportionately found in socially disadvantaged populations. Racial and ethnic minorities, persons with low income, individuals with serious mental illness, and those with disabilities, all tend to develop illnesses such as heart disease, diabetes, and lung disease more frequently, and at younger ages.

Those most at risk are also those less able to protect themselves and others from infection. They often live in overcrowded apartments, use public transportation, and may need to shop more frequently for basic necessities such as food and medications because of sporadic access to funds. Their access to health care services may be limited. They are more likely to be exposed to infection while working, due to their overrepresentation in essential jobs in transportation, government, health care, and food supply services, and in low wage or temporary jobs that may not allow telework or provide paid sick leave. They often lack internet access and telephone services, placing them at greater risk of social isolation and for being uninformed about what they need to do to protect themselves. Due to historical and current experiences of discrimination and stigma, they may distrust the very institutions they need to protect them during a pandemic.

Once ill with the coronavirus, many individuals in vulnerable communities will also have a hard time protecting themselves and others from harm. How do you keep a physical distance from others when you live in a small apartment with two or three other families? What if you are afraid to visit the doctor because you are uninsured or fear being deported? And, what if you live in housing for seniors and nonelderly disabled persons who require assistance from others for activities of daily living, and you are now confined to your apartment with limited access to visitors? How do you stay at home or shelter in place if you are homeless?

What can be done?

There is no time to waste to answer these concerns. The first step is recognizing the role of these inequities in spreading the coronavirus; then, we must pursue concrete actions to address them.

Those include:

Expand housing. In the short term, emergency funds should be used to convert hotels and dorms to locations to hold people with mild symptoms or in quarantine. The federal government should also extend its suspension of foreclosures and evictions on mortgages backed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac beyond 60 days. State legislators should urge their judicial branches put a moratorium on evictions and eviction filings, and use financial resources and rental debt forgiveness to prevent harm to tenants with low income. Longer-term, economic stimulus funding should be directed toward incentives for builders and real estate developers to create affordable housing options through new construction or repair of existing properties.

Provide food for people staying home. State leaders should request waivers of restrictions on food assistance (including the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and WIC) and apply for funding to support online food purchasing and home delivery by recipients. They should also provide incentives to food providers to deliver food to low-income neighborhoods free or at a reduced fee. Additional funding should be provided to food banks. The eligibility requirements for food assistance should be broadened to include nonelderly persons with disabilities.

Support education. The Covid-19 pandemic response may exacerbate inequities by undermining continuity of learning, food security, health, housing and safety and child supervision for vulnerable families. To keep kids learning at home, policymakers should support broad access to computers and tablets and free internet in low-income areas and the development of systems for school districts, which are a critical source of food, health care, and behavioral and mental health supports for children.

Promote sick leave and other health care benefits. All employers should provide sick leave as well as quarantine leave, to reduce the chance that low-wage workers will unwittingly spread the virus in order to earn needed income. In addition, Congress should require full access to health care for people with symptoms of coronavirus. Otherwise, people who can infect others may stay in their communities, afraid of potential medical bills. Options include a federal coronavirus insurance program, expanding Medicaid, adding a major federal reinsurance program, and opening up health insurance exchanges for special enrollment periods.

Communities should lead.

In pursuing these policies, there’s a balance to be struck between the roles of local and state and federal officials. To reach these populations best, these initiatives should be based on guidance and input primarily from community-based organizations and leaders who have knowledge of the needs and available resources within vulnerable communities, but they will need to be funded and encouraged by state and federal leaders.

Another reason to give local authorities the lead is to address people’s wariness of institutions. Public officials and health care leaders should engage with trusted messengers, including the leaders of faith communities, to assist in communicating important information about the pandemic such as how to protect oneself and others, and where and when to seek help. This information should be transmitted using frequent and transparent messages that are accurate, and include disclosures about what is and what is not known and the differences between myths and truths.

Congress has taken some action to provide federal support to states, and several federal agencies have taken steps to protect our most vulnerable citizens. These include providing resources to small businesses, for example, to encourage them to keep people on the payroll. We are also encouraged that many state and local leaders have exercised their authority over employment practices, landlord-tenant relationships, utilities and nutrition assistance programs.

But much more needs to be done. Half measures will leave millions of Americans forced to choose between reducing their exposure to coronavirus and meeting basic needs including food and shelter.

For too long, helping the most vulnerable has been seen as an act of charity. The ties that bind the rich and poor, the powerful and the vulnerable, have been invisible. That is no longer true. We share the risk of viral infection. We share the health care system. We share the need to look out for one another. And when this global pandemic ends, our children and grandchildren will share the legacy we leave and the results of the choices we make today.

