President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE has asked a bipartisan group of lawmakers to join a panel tasked with determining how to reopen the U.S. economy, which has been hard hit by the rapid spread of the coronavirus.

The administration's invitations went to Republicans and Democrats in both chambers, multiple sources confirmed to The Hill.

The White House issued an announcement later Thursday afternoon naming 32 House members and 65 senators to the panel and calling it the “Opening Up America Again Congressional Group.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Among those invited were Senate Democratic Whip Dick Durbin Richard (Dick) Joseph DurbinKey senators negotiating potential deal to allow remote Senate hearings 13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening MORE (Ill.) and Sens. Mark Warner Mark Robert WarnerA tale of two governors: COVID-19 provides sharp leadership contrasts between Virginia's Northam, Maryland's Hogan Democrats request probe of Barr's remarks on firing of intelligence community IG Hillicon Valley: FBI sees spike in cyber crime during pandemic | Facebook to alert users exposed to virus misinformation | Bezos says mass testing needed to reopen economy MORE (D-Va.), Martin Heinrich Martin Trevor HeinrichThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Democrats call on Trump to halt border wall construction amid pandemic Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (D-N.M.), Dianne Feinstein Dianne Emiel FeinsteinDemocrats request probe of Barr's remarks on firing of intelligence community IG The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (D-Calif.), Maggie Hassan Margaret (Maggie) HassanTensions flare as Democrats press Pence over coronavirus testing The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (D-N.H.), Patrick Leahy Patrick Joseph LeahyThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Can the Trump administration prevent asylum-seeking aliens from entering the US during COVID-19? MORE (D-Vt.), Tammy Duckworth Ladda (Tammy) Tammy DuckworthThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Will Trump's plan to reopen the economy work? The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (D-Ill.), Jacky Rosen Jacklyn (Jacky) Sheryl RosenTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Shocking ignorance about the Holocaust illustrates the need to pass the Never Again Education Act Overnight Defense: Lawmakers tear into Pentagon over .8B for border wall | Dems offer bill to reverse Trump on wall funding | Senators urge UN to restore Iran sanctions MORE (D-Nev.) and Angus King Angus KingOvernight Health Care: White House says US has enough tests for phase one | Trump defends protesters challenging social distancing | Hospitals fear being shortchanged on virus funding Tensions flare as Democrats press Pence over coronavirus testing Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (I-Maine), who caucuses with Democrats.

Republican senators involved include Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse GOP Rep. French Hill named to coronavirus oversight committee MORE (Ky.) and Sens. Rob Portman Robert (Rob) Jones PortmanKey senators negotiating potential deal to allow remote Senate hearings The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (Ohio), Josh Hawley Joshua (Josh) David Hawley13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (Mo.), John Barrasso John Anthony BarrassoThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Overnight Energy: Trump rolls back Obama-era fuel efficiency standards | Controversial Keystone XL construction to proceed | Pressure mounts to close national parks amid pandemic MORE (Wyo.), Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsThe Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Democratic challenger outraises Collins in Maine Senate race Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (Maine), Rand Paul Randal (Rand) Howard PaulTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Democrats try to force McConnell's hand on coronavirus aid 13 things to know about coronavirus for today MORE (Ky.), Lamar Alexander Andrew (Lamar) Lamar AlexanderThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Reopening economy emerges as new political battleground MORE (Tenn.) Marsha Blackburn Marsha BlackburnThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Senior Pa. banking official calls for another T package; Trump tips hat to govs Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening China hawks flex muscle amid coronavirus fallout MORE (Tenn.), David Perdue (Ga.), Kelly Loeffler Kelly LoefflerTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day New ad targets McConnell's 'culture of corruption' amid coronavirus pandemic MORE (Ga.) and John Kennedy John Neely KennedyMORE (La.).

In fact, all Senate Republicans except for Sen. Mitt Romney Willard (Mitt) Mitt RomneyThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Will Trump's plan to reopen the economy work? Romney is only GOP senator not on new White House coronavirus task force Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (Utah) were among the names issued by the White House later Thursday.

House Democrats invited include Reps. Josh Gottheimer Joshua (Josh) GottheimerPelosi backs remote voting for House The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (N.J.), Stephanie Murphy Stephanie MurphyThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Frist says Manhattan Project-like initiative necessary to fight virus; WH to release plan for easing lockdowns The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (Fla.), Ro Khanna Rohit (Ro) KhannaThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Will Trump's plan to reopen the economy work? California to provide food industry employees with two weeks paid leave 14 things to know about coronavirus for today MORE (Calif.), Jimmy Panetta James Varni PanettaThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Lawmakers cry foul as Trump considers retreating from Open Skies Treaty MORE (Calif.), Tom Suozzi (N.Y.), Ted Deutch Theodore (Ted) Eliot DeutchTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Ocasio-Cortez knocks Pence: 'Utterly irresponsible to put him in charge of US coronavirus response' Father of Parkland shooting victim calls on Congress to take action MORE (Fla.), Derek Kilmer Derek Christian KilmerTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Washington state lawmakers press Boeing to accept aid Where do we go from here? Conservation can show the way MORE (Wash.), John Larson John Barry LarsonTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening The next stimulus packages should help seniors Democrats call for stimulus to boost Social Security benefits by 0 a month MORE (Conn.) and Henry Cuellar (Texas).

House Republicans who were involved include Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyMcCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Freedom Caucus chair calls for GOP to reject additional funds for state, local governments Top Republican voices skepticism of rule change to allow remote voting MORE (Calif.), Minority Whip Steve Scalise Stephen (Steve) Joseph ScaliseThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Republicans go on attack as loans for small businesses start to run out MORE (La.), GOP Conference Chairwoman Liz Cheney Elizabeth (Liz) Lynn CheneyTop Republicans call on Trump to fund WHO pending director-general's resignation Pelosi backs remote voting for House Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (Wyo.) and Reps. Greg Walden Gregory (Greg) Paul WaldenThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Overnight Energy: Trump rolls back Obama-era fuel efficiency standards | Controversial Keystone XL construction to proceed | Pressure mounts to close national parks amid pandemic MORE (Ore.), Patrick McHenry Patrick Timothy McHenryThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Bottom line MORE (N.C.), Jim Jordan James (Jim) Daniel JordanTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening House GOP lawmakers urge Senate to confirm Vought Hillicon Valley: Apple, Google launch virus tracing system | Republican says panel should no longer use Zoom | Lawmakers introduce bill to expand telehealth MORE (Ohio), Lee Zeldin Lee ZeldinTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening NY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Dybul interview; Boris Johnson update MORE (N.Y.) and Kevin Brady Kevin Patrick BradyTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening IG finds Treasury handled House request for Trump tax returns properly On The Money: Mnuchin, Schumer in talks to strike short-term relief deal | Small businesses struggling for loans | Treasury IG sends Dems report on handling of Trump tax returns MORE (Tex.).

ADVERTISEMENT

The formation of the congressional task force comes as Trump is eager to start reopening shuttered sectors of the country quickly as the coronavirus has devastated the economy. An additional 5.2 million people filed for unemployment last week, according to federal data released on Thursday morning. That puts the total number of unemployment claims over the past month at more than 22 million.

The president held respective phone calls with House and Senate members Thursday morning. Vice President Pence and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin Steven Terner MnuchinMcCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package 13 things to know for today on coronavirus On The Money: Millions wait for virus relief checks in major test for IRS | Senate misses deadline to replenish small-business loan program | Fresh produce goes to waste as coronavirus snarls supply chains MORE also participated in the call, according to Cuellar.

The call covered a number of topics, including additional funding for the Paycheck Protection Program, relief for small businesses, and the “rapidly expanding access to COVID-19 diagnostic and anti-body tests, ventilators, face masks, and other PPE,” or personal protective equipment, the White House said. Trump also informed lawmakers of plans to issue guidance to governors on reopening their state economies.

On Tuesday evening, the White House named a substantial group of executives from various industries as part of a council advising the president on plans to reopen the economy as the coronavirus outbreak subsides. The president held several calls with those leaders on Wednesday and was reportedly told by banking executives that the U.S. needed to ramp up testing capabilities before Americans return to work.

The White House is expected to release new guidelines on Thursday to help states make decisions on relaxing coronavirus restrictions so that Americans can return to work, and Trump has said he believes some states that have not seen a significant spread of the virus could see social distancing scaled back before May 1.

ADVERTISEMENT

“The battle continues, but the data suggests that nationwide we have passed the peak on new cases,” Trump said during a news conference Wednesday evening. “These encouraging developments have put us in a very strong position to finalize guidelines on states for reopening the country.”

The decision on when and how to ease restrictions will ultimately fall to state and local officials, many of whom have issued stay-at-home orders and other measures that extend into May or longer.

When to reopen the economy has become a rolling point of debate. Lifting social distancing restrictions too soon, health experts warn, risks a second surge in cases that would result in more deaths and economic instability.

But the hit to the market comes months before November, where Trump and Republicans were expected to run on the strength of the economy.

Trump has insisted that he wants to reopen in a safe manner while maintaining that officials cannot allow the cure to be “worse than the problem.” And a growing number of GOP senators are calling for a quick, but phased, reopening of businesses and industries that have been scaled down or closed altogether.

It’s "time for Texans to go back to work,” Sen. Ted Cruz Rafael (Ted) Edward CruzGovernors complain testing is weak spot in Trump plan The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (R-Texas) told a local TV station. “It may be that when people go back to work that they wear a mask and gloves for some period of time to limit the spread of disease.”

Democrats taking part in the White House task force quickly pledged to try to guide the panel toward not supporting lifting restrictions until steps like a nationwide testing regime were in place.

“Our primary focus must remain on the public health challenges at hand, starting with a much more comprehensive and faster testing infrastructure to track and respond to the spread of the virus. Reopening the country relies on making free testing readily available in every single community in every corner of the country, and ensuring that data is accessible and transparent,” Heinrich said in a statement.

“Ignoring science- and evidence-based recommendations and prematurely resuming business as usual would undoubtedly risk the lives of all of us,” he said.

Warner, who previously served as governor of Virginia, added in a statement that state and local officials need to be involved in the decision.

“Unfortunately, a rushed, haphazard reopening risks not only further lives lost but also further damage to our economy,” he said.

Juliegrace Brufke and Brett Samuels contributed. Updated at 4:22 p.m.