National Football League free agent Colin Kaepernick was silent on Tuesday after the NFL Players Association (NFLPA) filed a grievance over pro football’s new policy that forbids kneeling during the playing of the national anthem.

But a retweet by Kaepernick, who initiated the silent protest against police brutality by kneeling during the anthem, spoke volumes.

See Also: Will NFL Players Plan New Police Brutality Protests Despite New Anthem Policy?

The move seemed to co-sign a post that criticized an NFL owner for marching to President Donald Trump’s drumbeat against the players’ protest.

The NFL/MAGA crossover is extremely real. https://t.co/XxsXAkf7Q5 — Tim Kawakami (@timkawakami) July 10, 2018

The Super Bowl quarterback filed his own grievance against the league in 2017, which alleged that the owners colluded with each other to blackball him over the controversial protest. Trump has placed pressure on the owners to stop the protest, singling out the former San Francisco 49er for a vile attack.

Arizona Cardinals owner Michael Bidwill, talking Tuesday on a conservative talk radio show about Trump’s Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh, called on the players to avoid politics on game days, Pro Football Talk reported.

Meanwhile, the players’ union filed a non-injury grievance Tuesday on behalf of the players who want to challenge the league’s new ban against kneeling on the field during the anthem.

“The union’s claim is that this new policy, imposed by the NFL’s governing body without consultation with the NFLPA, is inconsistent with the collective bargaining agreement and infringes on player rights,” a statement from the union said.

NFL owners voted in May to approve a policy requiring players on the field to stand during the anthem. Players who violate the rule are subject to a fine. Those who disagree with the rule are allowed to stay in the locker room and come out on the field after the anthem is finished playing.

SEE ALSO:

Photo Shows NFL Player LeSean McCoy Brutally Beat His Girlfriend, Social Media Says

Trump-Supporting DA Calls ‘Ghetto’ Maxine Waters A ‘Bitch,’ Can’t Believe She Hasn’t Been Shot