'The Last Black Man in San Francisco' creators are working on a new SF movie in quarantine "We are only as healthy as the sickest person in our city,” Talbot said as they also discussed the current crisis with State Sen. candidate Jackie Fielder

Jimmie Fails and Joe Talbot attend the 2020 Film Independent Spirit Awards on Feb. 8, 2020 in Santa Monica, Calif. The childhood friends and co-creators of "The Last Black Man in San Francisco" joined State Sen. candidate Jackie Fielder for a virtual discussion on Thursday, where they talked about the current crisis and their plans for a new film set in San Francisco. less Jimmie Fails and Joe Talbot attend the 2020 Film Independent Spirit Awards on Feb. 8, 2020 in Santa Monica, Calif. The childhood friends and co-creators of "The Last Black Man in San Francisco" joined State ... more Photo: David Crotty/Patrick McMullan Via Getty Image Photo: David Crotty/Patrick McMullan Via Getty Image Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close 'The Last Black Man in San Francisco' creators are working on a new SF movie in quarantine 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

On any given morning in quarantine, Jimmie Fails wakes up to the sound of Joe Talbot singing in the shower.

The childhood friends and co-creators of “The Last Black Man in San Francisco” have been sheltering in place together in the Mission District: cooking, watching movies, reading books and generally trying to stay sane as their lives are put on hold.

They’re also using their time in isolation to work on a new film set in San Francisco.

It’s been almost a year since “The Last Black Man in San Francisco” was released in theaters: a critically acclaimed love letter to the rapidly changing city they grew up in. Inspired by Fails' own upbringing, it's an odyssey-like journey through a San Francisco he strives to belong to as he faces the ongoing threat of being priced out.

It’s a theme that remains all the more relevant today as unemployment rates skyrocket and thousands of California residents are rendered incapable of paying their day-to-day expenses, much less their rent. And while the city is working to open up hotel rooms to house its homeless populations, some of those individuals have already been exposed to the virus amid a recent outbreak in the city’s largest shelter.

RELATED: ‘The Last Black Man in San Francisco’ director creates map of the city featuring things he loves

Fails and Talbot discussed the current crisis with State Sen. candidate and activist Jackie Fielder in a livestreamed conversation on Thursday evening.

“It’s deeply frustrating,” Talbot told Fielder, a 25-year-old Stanford alum running against incumbent Scott Wiener. “I think Hillary Ronen said it really well, she said, you know, ‘We are all in this together.’ And we really are. We are only as healthy as the sickest person in our city.”

Photo: Screenshot/Jackie Fielder On Twitch In a livestreamed discussion, they talked about the impact of the...

Fails agreed, adding that while “The Last Black Man in San Francisco” intends to show how the city has changed, its purpose is to also to encourage unity among residents — now more than ever.

“As a true San Franciscan, you have to fight for keeping things the way they were when we were brought up. Keeping those same values, that same sort of spirit,” said Fails.

That’s exactly what the duo hopes to accomplish as they spend their time working on another film that will eventually be shot in the city. More information is soon to come, said Talbot.

“For the Bay, people are going to be really excited. We’ll just say that,” he said. "It is a weird vision, it’s a fun summer movie.”

It’s also going to serve up a heavy dose of nostalgia.

“That’s the place we work from, ” said Fails. “I think that people that are from the Bay are just very reminiscent.”

Towards the end of the conversation, Fielder thanked Fails and Talbot for their critical — and timely — work.

"I will always be of the belief that culture carries policies," said Fielder. "We can’t just throw facts and numbers at people to convince them the world is messed up in these particular ways. That's the role of storytellers, and that's really what is going to carry people into whatever is coming after this."

Watch the full livestream here.

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

Sign up for 'The Daily' newsletter for the latest on coronavirus here.

Amanda Bartlett is an SFGATE associate digital reporter. Email: amanda.bartlett@sfgate.com | Twitter: @byabartlett