This Bay Area town has started weekly porch concerts to boost morale

Alameda musicians Deborah Crooks and Kwame Copeland play acoustic folk-rock on their porch for neighbors every Friday night. Alameda musicians Deborah Crooks and Kwame Copeland play acoustic folk-rock on their porch for neighbors every Friday night. Photo: Grant Kalasky Photo: Grant Kalasky Image 1 of / 17 Caption Close This Bay Area town has started weekly porch concerts to boost morale 1 / 17 Back to Gallery

On Friday evenings during shelter in place, the peaceful neighborhood streets of Alameda stand quiet. But at 6 p.m., if you listen carefully, you might hear a neighbor start to strum a guitar from their porch, or sing opera from their driveway.

A few weeks ago, Alameda resident Jeewon Kim Serrato was inspired by Italians singing on their balconies, as well as a friend in New Orleans who had started hosting porch concerts. So she decided to run the idea past her community in the 12,000-strong Alameda Peeps Facebook group.

“I posted in the group that I was looking for something to keep our spirits up,” said Serrato. “I knew that this island was full of talent, whether it’s singing or painting or metal working.”

The response was immediate — everyone loved the idea. March 20 brought the inaugural day of Alameda Porch Concerts, in which neighbors across the city gave musical performances from their porches, balconies, lawns or driveways to small, socially distanced gatherings of people who live on their block. And ever since, each Friday at 6 p.m., the performances have continued.

Last Friday’s lineup included a DJ set of electronic music played from his bedroom out onto the street, a bass and ukulele duo, acoustic Fountains of Wayne covers, and a folk music sing-along with a fiddle.

Performers add their addresses to a form, which another neighbor, Irene Nexica, then organizes into a map. Audience members — all neighbors — keep at least six feet away from one another, with some performers even marking spots with duct tape on the ground.

Marisa Lenhardt, a conservatory-trained opera singer who can be found singing opera on the trapeze at Burning Man, performed last Friday.

RELATED: People are losing their jobs. But in Marin, no neighbor is going hungry.

Dressed in full costume and makeup, her blue hair piled high upon her head, Lenhardt’s impressive vocals soared over techno beats down the block. A few mesmerized neighbors on their daily walks or bike rides stopped in their tracks when they heard her. Even passing cars on the residential street slowed to watch. An elderly woman next door watched from her porch; another neighbor sat in her driveway in sweatpants to listen with a glass of wine.

“It’s a difficult time for people in the performing arts, because without an audience, you’re just rehearsing,” said Lenhardt. “So I’ve really glommed onto this idea. One of the reasons I do the full costume is to create a moment that is completely removed from right now. I can't do the things I need or want to do right now, but I can do this.”

Deborah Crooks, another professional musician who participates in the porch concerts with her husband Kwame Copeland, says the weekly shows are a blessing in a time when all other performance opportunities have dried up. She says she feels fortunate that her husband has a day job that keeps their bills paid, but other musicians aren’t so lucky.

“All of our shows just went away, so to have a weekly gig right now is kind of relieving,” said Crooks — albeit an unpaid gig. “It’s really good for the community. It feels like a good celebration for people among this feeling of helplessness.”

As the two musicians, who form an acoustic folk-rock and blues band called Bay Station, played on their porch Friday, a neighbor and her small child danced on the sidewalk. The duo performed a COVID-19-themed song they wrote for the occasion: “COVID-19, you’re so mean, now we’ve gotta self-quarantine," sung Crooks.

RELATED: How a San Francisco neighborhood came together for a 4-year-old's birthday

It’s not just professionals that participate in the porch concerts, however — and you don’t have to have a porch, either. Serrato also hosts Zoom meetings on Fridays at 6 p.m. for neighbors who don’t feel comfortable leaving their houses, and she’s been really impressed by some of the performances from amateurs she’s seen there.

“There was a woman who shared chalk art that her daughter drew, and another woman who sang a hymn,” explained Serrato. “She was not a professional, but she sang from the heart and it really moved me.”

It comes as no surprise to Alameda residents that their community so readily embraced this city-wide talent show.

“It’s a really special place,” said Lenhardt. “As it’s grown throughout the years, it’s maintained a fierce sense of community and behaved like a town that’s much smaller than it is. People care about each other.”

However, they think the idea could work in other Bay Area cities, too — or, if not a concert series, something else of a similar community-building nature, like Marin County’s nightly “howl,” or the cheering to support frontline workers that many cities and towns across the country are doing.

These small (and safely conducted) displays of community boost morale in the midst of a terrifying crisis. And for some, they hold even more significance.

“This experience has reconnected me with my purpose and who I am,” said Lenhardt, tearing up over the phone. “If I can share this — if I can brighten anyone's day for even a moment and take them out of the negative of this experience, then I’m thrilled.”

Madeline Wells is an SFGATE associate digital reporter. Email: madeline.wells@sfgate.com | Twitter: @madwells22