Everyone braced for it though they hoped it wouldn’t happen.

Still, superintendents across the state appeared in agreement with Gov. Greg Abbott’s decision to keep Texas schools closed for the rest of the semester, pointing to public health experts who have indicated social distancing is helping to flatten the curve.

Dallas ISD Superintendent Michael Hinojosa said Friday that Abbott’s decision wasn’t “a surprise, at all.”

With coronavirus still affecting thousands of Texans daily, “it was inevitable,” Hinojosa said.

“When you’ve been around this business for as long as I have, you can read the tea leaves and see that there’s not going to be an easy solution for this,” said Hinojosa, whose decades-long career as a school administrator started in 1987. “That’s why we said we were ‘closed indefinitely’ right from the beginning. When we made that choice, the facts were changing every 30 minutes.”

Abbott announced Friday afternoon that schools across the state — from elementary to college — would stay shuttered through the end of the semester.

Prior to Abbott’s decision, 21 states, including all of Texas’ neighbors — Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma and New Mexico — had closed schools for the remainder of the academic year.

Cedar Hill Superintendent Gerald Hudson issued a statement saying it’s critical that schools stay closed to help stop the spread of the virus and to prepare for the next school year. Already, Cedar Hill has moved graduation ceremonies from May 21 to June 25. That plan will proceed unless other developments make that unfeasible.

Allen ISD Superintendent Robin Bullock echoed Hudson’s sentiments.

“While we are sad that we cannot open our doors, we trust and respect the decisions made by our health officials and state leaders,” Bullock said in a statement.

Logically, Janet Shuey, a senior at the Judge Barefoot Sanders Law Magnet in DISD, knows it's safer for everyone to limit social interactions. But she was still disappointed by the news and wanted a chance to spend time with friends before they scattered across the country to attend different colleges.

“I just want a proper goodbye,” she said. “We’ve been doing online classes for several weeks now, but it's not the same.”

Parent Sandra Mireles held out hope that her children could return to school by the start of May.

Two of her daughters are seniors at Bryan Adams High School and her youngest son is a fourth-grader at Martha Turner Reilly Elementary School.

Mireles, who is an office manager at a temp agency, has had to work most days to help fill posts at area businesses. So she hasn’t been able to stay home to help her children. But her 21-year-old son has stepped in to help make sure homework gets done and that his younger siblings are taken care of throughout the day.

“It really just breaks my heart for my seniors,” she said. “With this new announcement, it’s just like, what do we do now or what should we expect next?”

In a gesture to its seniors, Allen ISD staff and board members put yard signs at the homes of every senior student on Friday, “as a small recognition of their final year at Allen High School,” Bullock said.

Jennifer Espinoza, who has a senior at Pinkston High School and an eighth-grader at the Uplift Heights Preparatory charter school, expects the extended closure to be difficult for her two daughters who miss their friends and teachers. But she and her husband try to keep the family focused on what they have gained during the prolonged time together.

“We’ve definitely gotten closer as a family,” Espinoza said. “My senior was a cheerleader and active in church. I taught ministry. My other daughter had her activities and my husband worked nights. Our schedules always conflicted. But now, we’re eating meals together and even cooking together. I just remind my girls that there is a silver lining in this.”

Now, the question becomes whether schools will open for the 2020-21 school year, which starts in four months.

“Right now our expectations are that, come August, we’ll be able to launch a traditional school year,” Hinojosa said. “We’re going to hold out all hope that will happen.”