Fancy weddings are getting postponed these days, but not fancy wedding dresses.

The demand for dresses to wear at ceremonies no one can attend, at least not right now, keeps going up. No one is more surprised at that than one of the biggest online wedding gown vendors, the Azazie company of San Jose.

“In these uncertain times, it seems people want to get married more than ever,” said Ranu Coleman, chief marketing officer for the company. “People are still hoping, still planning.”

Instead of big weddings in large churches, the trend now is two-person, live-streamed weddings in living rooms, with the officiant 6 feet away. Photographers and elaborate bouquets are out. Selfies and something from the garden are in.

The wedding dress business finds itself in limbo. At Azazie, the company’s dresses are made to order and take six weeks to produce. That means dresses delivered now were ordered before the pandemic began. And dresses ordered now could be delivered after the crisis diminishes. Or maybe not. Who knows, said Coleman. Marriage is a mysterious institution.

Now Playing:

But with so many brides — and brides’ families — going through tough times because of the pandemic, the company decided to give away five wedding dresses, which usually sell for $500 or so. To get a free wedding dress, you have to write a short statement saying why you need one, then email it to social@azazie.com. So far, 75 prospective brides have, Coleman said.

To win a dress, she said, it would help not only to be going through hard times, because most everyone is, but going through hard times while helping others get through the pandemic. Good luck in the contest, she said, and that goes for married life, too.

Couples are eloping who never would have considered eloping, Coleman said. Usually “eloping” is a bad word in the wedding dress business, but Coleman said the pandemic is changing things.

“We’re hearing from people who are having small weddings now and planning another large celebration for later, when this is all over,” she said, which would be the best of all possible outcomes.

Shopping malls miss their seniors: Shopping malls miss Bay Area seniors almost as much as Bay Area seniors miss shopping malls.

Three Bay Area malls are asking the public to remind seniors living near the malls that they haven’t been forgotten — and neither have their mall shopping trips in senior center vans.

The malls are soliciting short videos that will be shown at senior residences near the Alameda Landing mall in Alameda, the Downtown Pleasant Hill mall in Pleasant Hill and the East Washington Place mall in Petaluma. Some videos have already come in. (Type in https://bit.ly/2yq4tqv to enter your video.)

“To all the grandmas and grandpas who are feeling a little bit cut off from the world right now, we want you to know that we are staying away to keep you safe,” said one girl who was holding a dog.

“We made these pictures to keep you calm, relaxed and cheerful,” said two other girls, who proceeded to show their sidewalk chalk drawings of a bunny and a flower. “Bye. Make sure to take care of yourselves.”

The videos will go to nearby residences, along with messages reminding seniors that the merchants are missing them, too, very badly, and can’t wait for their shopping trips to resume.

Now Playing:

“Seniors and shopping malls are a big part of society,” said Heath McCue, marketing director for the three malls.

The three best videos will win mall shopping sprees. The spree winners, along with everyone else, will have to wait for the shopping malls to reopen before they can do any shopping.

Steve Rubenstein is a staff writer for The San Francisco Chronicle. Email: srubenstein@sfchronicle.com

Share with us the ‘good news’ The news these days can be sobering, even grim. There’s a lot of uncertainty and discomfort most everywhere you look. But amid the darkness, there are rays of light: young people helping older neighbors, musicians and fitness coaches offering their talents online, neighbors having outdoor dance parties (using proper social distancing). We’d like to know about examples of good news you have witnessed during this time. You can tell us your thoughts online at SFChronicle.com by using our Assignment Editor tool, or send an email (which can include a photo) with the subject line “Good News” to metro@sfchronicle.com.