Hello from the desert!

It’s your slightly dusty, definitely dehydrated correspondent here. With seven months worth of Rangers games — who knows, maybe more! — beginning on Friday with the traditional four-hour long exhibition opener against Kansas City, I wanted to bring you a few updates.

Maybe you are new around here. If so, thanks for giving us a try. Maybe you’ve been around a while. If so, thanks for your trust and loyalty (and sorry about all the dad jokes on Twitter). Occasionally, this year I might write you a personal note just to keep you updated. I do believe one real benefit of the digital/social media age is that we can communicate a little more freely and actually interact. I think it helps us get a feel for what’s important to you and it helps you get to know who it is that you are trusting with your time on the Rangers.

I also know there is a lot of stuff coming at you and just wanted to give you a rundown of what you can expect from us, beyond moment-to-moment coverage of what happens on the field for the Rangers.

Like, this week for example. We’re rolling out a new project, a video interview series, called “Meat with the Press.” I’ve always thought food was a great vehicle for communication and we’ve decided to try to do some sit down interviews with Rangers players (and hopefully other significant North Texas figures) to break bread, talk life and tell stories. We’re starting this week with Joey Gallo. We hope you will give it a try. And I hope you will give me some feedback on what you like and what you didn’t. Only way to get better.

It’s just one example.

As I begin my 24th season of covering the Rangers, I’m joined by Sam Blum on the beat. Sam also covers SMU for us. He is in spring training now, getting more familiar with the team. And I can report he’s both getting his work in and in the best shape of his life. You can reach him on Twitter at @SamBlum3. He will be a lot more helpful on your March Madness brackets than I will be.

I wanted to remind you of a few of the different platforms on which we are trying to meet you for the different facets of our coverage beyond the breaking news, game coverage, columns and feature stories.

You can always send me a question for the weekly mailbag, #EvanHelpUs, by tweeting to me (@Evan_P_Grant) and including the hashtag #EvanHelpUs in your question. And then you will get mostly rational explanations with a bit snark mixed in.

There is always the Rangers podcast, Ballzy, which we produce weekly that includes sometimes coherent arguments between myself, Kevin Sherrington and David Moore. We occasionally feature guests. And we hope to experiment with other ways to use it to keep your interest. You can subscribe here and it’s FREE (you do like free stuff, don’t you?)

If you can’t stay up to date on the coverage, but want an easy to digest compendium, sign up for our Rangers newsletter, dubbed The Dirt, and get it all delivered to your mailbox for reading at your convenience.

We will be ranking the top 10 Rangers prospects heading into the season and updating their progress regularly.

We will be bringing you a guide to Globe Life Field before the season opens that hopefully can help you navigate the new place. But, if you want to know about the synthetic grass the Rangers will be using, here’s an in-depth report we did on it when the decision was made to go that route.

And hopefully we will throw some other new wrinkles at you along the way. As always, we want your input and feedback to help guide us. We report for you.

Thanks for reading and following. Let’s have some fun together this season.

— Evan

Find more Rangers stories from The Dallas Morning News here.