Welcome to another episode of “Ocasio-Cortez Doesn’t Get It,” where we delve into the myriad of things New York Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D) runs her mouth about, but doesn’t seem to understand.

In this episode, everyone’s least liked democratic socialist responded to Rahm Emanuel going on MSNBC and saying that the hard-leftism spouted by the likes of Ocasio-Cortez and Rep. Ilhan Omar of Minnesota is only putting the rest of the Democrats in a disadvantageous position due to the distractions caused by socialist ideals and radical environmental solutions.

Rahm made it very clear that the energy the freshman Democrats are bringing is good, but that progressive policies like the kind they advocate aren’t representative of middle America.

Rahm Emanuel suggests that The Bronx and Minneapolis are not "the middle of the country" and that @AOC + @IlhanMN's policies don't represent "the middle" either. Emanuel represents a deep blue Chicago and is against a Green New Deal and Medicare for All – so what's his excuse? pic.twitter.com/SdwnwWXU2y — Justice Democrats (@justicedems) March 15, 2019

This angered Ocasio-Cortez, who took to Twitter to counter Emanuel’s claims by touting the fact that “Ilhan reps Minnesota” and that Rep. Rashida Tlaib “reps Michigan.”

“The progressive message WON in 2016 primaries,” tweeted Ocasio-Cortez.

Can someone break down the “progressivism doesn’t work in the midwest” thing? – Ilhan reps Minnesota

– Rashida reps Michigan

– #GreenNewDeal + #MedicareForAll are polling as top issues in Iowa

– The progressive message WON in 2016 primaries So what do these folks really mean? https://t.co/3MxN5DLXEn — Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (@AOC) March 15, 2019

The only problem here is that Ocasio-Cortez is wrong about Omar’s, Tlaib’s, or even her reach. Representatives only represent a district within the state, not the state itself. There are many districts within a state, and not all of them are as blue as those three Democratic freshmen would like.

As Twitchy pointed out, Twitter moved to correct her false assumption, starting with one user who pointed out that they rep ONE blue district within their respective states.

They don’t represent Michigan or Minnesota, they represent blue districts in those states. — Mikey (@mikeyoranje88) March 16, 2019

They rep blue districts in those particular states, they aren't statewide candidates. Don't mislead. — Speaker Pelosi, we have been waiting for you (@jahosiphats) March 16, 2019

In fact, compared to the number of people living in the midwest they don’t represent, their just one pebble in a mountain of rocks.

Those two representatives represent approximately 1.5 million people together they Midwest has well over 100 million people. I don't think listing those 2 reps, and anecdotal support in Democratic primaries in 2016 and some polls about issues that are important to those voting… — Irish O'Apple Jokes ⚾️ (@goodapplejokes) March 16, 2019

…in Democratic primaries in Iowa prove anything about progressivism working.

Evidence of progressivism working would be results from progressive policies, not polls of support for bills and representatives. — Irish O'Apple Jokes ⚾️ (@goodapplejokes) March 16, 2019

It seems as if AOC is trying to make the things she supports, and her fellow freshman radicals, seem more important than they actually are.

This isn’t surprising coming from someone like Ocasio-Cortez, who tends to forget she’s even an elected representative sometimes, and likes to say things like “we’re in charge”…

Yup. If you don’t like the #GreenNewDeal, then come up with your own ambitious, on-scale proposal to address the global climate crisis. Until then, we’re in charge – and you’re just shouting from the cheap seats. https://t.co/h3KSJhHqDN — Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (@AOC) February 23, 2019

And call herself “the boss.”

Socialist Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY) on the widespread criticism of her Green New Deal: "I’m like, you try. … Until you do it, I’m the boss! How about that?!" pic.twitter.com/vkp15KBttd — Ryan Saavedra (@RealSaavedra) February 24, 2019

If Ocasio-Cortez truly wants to get ahead, then she’d be better off — and I can’t believe I’m saying this — heed Rahm Emanuel advice, and pull back on the throttle. Her exuberance for socialistic change in America is turning people off. While more people than ever know who she is, her unfavorability rating is climbing by double digits.