To view past editions of The Hill's 12:30 Report, click here: http://bit.ly/1M1mIfw

To receive The Hill's 12:30 Report in your inbox, please sign up here: http://bit.ly/1Tt4hqN

--> A midday take on what's happening in politics and how to have a sense of humor about it.*

*Ha. Haha. Hahah. Sniff. Haha. Sniff. Ha--breaks down crying hysterically.

The Hill’s 12:30 Report: Trump taps lawmakers to advise on reopening | White House to release new social distancing guidelines today | How reopening became a partisan fight | Small business loan program out of money | Lawmakers divided on next steps | Another 5.2M file for unemployment | 200 days until Election Day | NBC Sports to air 100 hours from past Olympics

HAPPENING TODAY

How to reopen an economy, a step-by-step guide:

Via The Hill’s Morgan Chalfant, the White House is expected to release a plan today for how states can relax social distancing guidelines and reopen businesses amid the coronavirus pandemic. https://bit.ly/3bg1foj

Trump’s reasoning: President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE claimed yesterday that the U.S. has “passed the peak” of coronavirus cases nationwide.

When to expect the announcement: After President Trump and Vice President Pence’s 3 p.m. call with governors.

This a.m. — Trump chooses a group of lawmakers to advise on reopening:

Via The Hill’s Morgan Chalfant, Jordain Carney and Scott Wong, Trump is asking a bipartisan group of lawmakers to help with determining when and how to reopen the U.S. economy. https://bit.ly/3et6Jhi

Democrats invited to be on the panel: Senate Democratic Whip Dick Durbin Richard (Dick) Joseph DurbinKey senators negotiating potential deal to allow remote Senate hearings 13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening MORE (D-Ill.); Sens. Mark Warner Mark Robert WarnerA tale of two governors: COVID-19 provides sharp leadership contrasts between Virginia's Northam, Maryland's Hogan Democrats request probe of Barr's remarks on firing of intelligence community IG Hillicon Valley: FBI sees spike in cyber crime during pandemic | Facebook to alert users exposed to virus misinformation | Bezos says mass testing needed to reopen economy MORE (D-Va.), Martin Heinrich Martin Trevor HeinrichThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Democrats call on Trump to halt border wall construction amid pandemic Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (D-N.M.), Dianne Feinstein Dianne Emiel FeinsteinDemocrats request probe of Barr's remarks on firing of intelligence community IG The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (D-Calif.), Maggie Hassan Margaret (Maggie) HassanTensions flare as Democrats press Pence over coronavirus testing The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (D-N.H.), Patrick Leahy Patrick Joseph LeahyThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Can the Trump administration prevent asylum-seeking aliens from entering the US during COVID-19? MORE (D-Vt.), Tammy Duckworth Ladda (Tammy) Tammy DuckworthThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Will Trump's plan to reopen the economy work? The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (D-Ill.) and Angus King (I-Maine); Reps. Josh Gottheimer Joshua (Josh) GottheimerPelosi backs remote voting for House The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (N.J.), Stephanie Murphy Stephanie MurphyThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Frist says Manhattan Project-like initiative necessary to fight virus; WH to release plan for easing lockdowns The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (Fla.), Ro Khanna Rohit (Ro) KhannaThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Will Trump's plan to reopen the economy work? California to provide food industry employees with two weeks paid leave 14 things to know about coronavirus for today MORE (Calif.), Jimmy Panetta James Varni PanettaThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Lawmakers cry foul as Trump considers retreating from Open Skies Treaty MORE (Calif.) and Tom Suozzi (N.Y.) https://bit.ly/3et6Jhi

Republicans we know have been asked: Via Politico, “Among the Senate Republicans asked to be on the task force are Senate HELP Committee Chairman Lamar Alexander Andrew (Lamar) Lamar AlexanderThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Reopening economy emerges as new political battleground MORE of Tennessee and Sens. John Barrasso John Anthony BarrassoThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Overnight Energy: Trump rolls back Obama-era fuel efficiency standards | Controversial Keystone XL construction to proceed | Pressure mounts to close national parks amid pandemic MORE of Wyoming, Rob Portman Robert (Rob) Jones PortmanKey senators negotiating potential deal to allow remote Senate hearings The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE of Ohio, Joni Ernst Joni Kay ErnstJoe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day MORE of Iowa, Josh Hawley Joshua (Josh) David Hawley13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE of Missouri, Mike Braun Michael BraunThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Democrats, Trump set to battle over implementing T relief bill Senate GOP looking at ,200 in coronavirus cash payments MORE of Indiana, Shelley Moore Capito Shelley Wellons Moore CapitoSenate misses deadline, but talks on loans go on The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Howard Dean calls for guests to boycott MSNBC over Trump briefings MORE of West Virginia, Pat Toomey Patrick (Pat) Joseph ToomeyGOP senators push for quick, partial reopening of economy NSA improperly collected US phone records in October, new documents show Overnight Defense: Pick for South Korean envoy splits with Trump on nuclear threat | McCain blasts move to suspend Korean military exercises | White House defends Trump salute of North Korean general MORE of Pennsylvania, John Cornyn John CornynThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening On The Money: Small business lending funds nearly depleted | Trump says White House to release guidelines on relaxing social distancing Thursday | Fed's efforts on coronavirus raise eyebrows The Hill's Campaign Report: Warren throws her support behind Biden MORE of Texas, Ted Cruz Rafael (Ted) Edward CruzGovernors complain testing is weak spot in Trump plan The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE of Texas and Kevin Cramer Kevin John CramerThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening GOP senators target WHO as part of coronavirus probe Tentative deal would slash global oil production by 10 percent MORE of North Dakota … Among House Republicans invited is House Minority Whip Steve Scalise Stephen (Steve) Joseph ScaliseThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Republicans go on attack as loans for small businesses start to run out MORE of Louisiana, Greg Walden Gregory (Greg) Paul WaldenThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Overnight Energy: Trump rolls back Obama-era fuel efficiency standards | Controversial Keystone XL construction to proceed | Pressure mounts to close national parks amid pandemic MORE of Oregon and Patrick McHenry Patrick Timothy McHenryThe Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Bottom line MORE of North Carolina.” https://politi.co/2VgVrFz

It’s Thursday. I’m Cate Martel with a quick recap of the morning and what’s coming up. Send comments, story ideas and events for our radar to cmartel@thehill.com — and follow along on Twitter @CateMartel and Facebook.

Did someone forward this to you? Want your own copy? Sign up here to receive The Hill's 12:30 Report in your inbox daily: http://bit.ly/2kjMNnn

NEWS THIS MORNING

The sharpest rise in unemployment in U.S. history:

More than 5.2 million people filed unemployment claims during the week ending on April 11, according to the Department of Labor. https://bit.ly/34FeNqV

For context: More than 22 million people have filed for unemployment benefits in the last four weeks. Today’s report is the fourth in a row with more than 1 million claims. That level had never been reached.

What to expect with the unemployment rate: “Economists believe that the unemployment rate is likely already up to at least 15 percent, a stunning rise from a 50-year low of 3.5 percent earlier this year. Some predict that number could end up reaching as high as the Depression-era peak of 20 percent.”

The small business loan program is out of money:

Via The Hill’s Jordain Carney and Sylvan Lane, “The initial $349 billion pool for emergency loans for small businesses derailed by the coronavirus pandemic has run dry as Republicans and Democrats squabble over how to replenish the relief program.” https://bit.ly/2VBfo8G

Details: “The Treasury Department and Small Business Administration (SBA) have tapped the entirety of funding allotted for the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), which offers forgivable loans to small businesses intended to keep workers on payroll and small firms from going under.”

WHERE THINGS STAND

Cases in the U.S.: 640,014

Deaths in the U.S.: 31,002

Breakdown of the numbers: https://cnn.it/2UAgW3y

TIDBIT — WOW, THAT’S AN EFFECTIVE PSA:

Using mouse traps and ping-pong balls. Watch: https://bit.ly/3eoHnRQ

NEXT STEPS

Interesting read — Reopening the economy has become a partisan debate:

Via The Hill’s Mike Lillis, the question of when and how to reopen the U.S. economy amid the coronavirus pandemic has become a divisive issue for Republicans and Democrats. https://bit.ly/34Kki7Q

Where Republicans stand — open sooner rather than later: “Behind President Trump, Republicans are increasingly eager to get businesses reopened and customers into their doors, warning that a prolonged economic shutdown — even in the name of protecting public health — will do more harm to the nation’s long-term viability than the coronavirus itself.”

Where Democrats stand — wait until we know it’s safe: “Democrats are sounding a different alarm. While they, too, want to get the economy back up and running as quickly as possible, they warn that scaling back public safeguards too soon would cause more infections, kill more people, spark deeper societal fears and undermine the economic rebound that any reopening was intended to promote.”

Where the decision ~actually~ lies — think local: “The ultimate decision about when and how to reopen the country's economy is largely in the hands of state and local officials, and governors in both parties have suggested they fear opening their state economies and relaxing social distancing policies too early could backfire.”

President Trump has a lot at stake: “The balance they’re seeking is a delicate one — more nuanced than just a simple case of economic versus public health, since the two are intrinsically entwined. And perhaps no one is walking a finer line than the president, who believes his best chance at reelection is a booming economy but is also wary that reopening the country prematurely could backfire if it spikes the number of coronavirus cases, spooks markets and drives the economy further downward.”

How this could play out: https://bit.ly/34Kki7Q

Op-ed on how to reopen: https://bit.ly/2KbtVCQ

ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL

200 days until Election Day:

Via The Hill’s Julia Manchester and Max Greenwood, “Democrats are growing more confident about their chances of retaking power in Washington with 200 days to go before Election Day. It’s an election that both sides now see as turning on the coronavirus pandemic and the American public’s views on how President Trump steers the country through the worst public health crisis in modern memory.” https://bit.ly/2VBDPTJ

What to expect: https://bit.ly/2VBDPTJ

NOTABLE TWEETS

If you’ve been watching Andrew Cuomo Andrew CuomoOvernight Health Care: White House says US has enough tests for phase one | Trump defends protesters challenging social distancing | Hospitals fear being shortchanged on virus funding Trump defends demonstrators protesting social distancing restrictions 13 things to know for today on coronavirus MORE’s briefings, you will find this Twitter account funny:

ON TAP

The House and Senate are out. President Trump and Vice President Pence are in Washington, D.C.

8:30 a.m. EDT: President Trump participated in a Group of Seven video teleconference to discuss the coronavirus.

10 a.m. EDT: President Trump held a phone call with members of the House.

11 a.m. EDT: President Trump held a phone call with senators.

1 p.m. EDT: Vice President Pence speaks with Senate Democrats.

3 p.m. EDT: President Trump and Vice President Pence participate in a video teleconference with governors.

WHAT TO WATCH

2:15 p.m. EDT: President Trump gives remarks to celebrate America’s truckers. Livestream: https://bit.ly/3afpRw6

5 p.m. EDT: The White House Coronavirus Task Force holds a press briefing. Livestream: https://bit.ly/3ad5m37

NOW FOR THE FUN STUFF...

Today is National Eggs Benedict Day.

Remember sports?:

NBC Sports is airing nearly 100 hours from previous Olympics each night for the rest of April. Details: https://on.today.com/3coITS9

And because you made it this far, here’s a dad who figured out a way for his daughters to keep skiing this season: https://bit.ly/2Vu7Gxg