With no baseball, we’re left to sit around and make lists. Good thing we were already in the beginning stages of ranking our top 20 Rangers prospects for the year. We’ve been unveiling one a day from Monday through Friday over the course of four weeks, based on rankings from Baseball America, MLB Pipeline and our own research.

One annual caveat: It’s impossible to compare prospects evenly. One guy may have a higher floor and a quicker path to the majors, but another may have more risk and upside. It’s all a balancing act. We’d like to think that if we err on any side, it is slightly toward performance.

No. 3: Leody Taveras, CF

How acquired

Signed as a free agent out of Tenares, Dominican Republic, on July 2, 2015. Received a $2.1 million signing bonus.

About 2019

The Rangers have always pushed Taveras, challenging him to play “young” for most leagues. He began 2019 as a 20-year-old in his second season at Class-A Down East, but after hitting .294 with a .368 on-base percentage in the first half of the season, he was pushed ahead to Double-A Frisco. He hit .265 there in 65 games, but the rest of his slash line included a .320 OBP and a .375 slugging percentage, which equaled a .695 OPS.

Pros

This discussion begins with elite defense that makes him a major league-ready defender in center field. He also has above-average speed, though he hasn’t been able to fully utilize that on the bases yet. Defensively, he projects as a legitimate all-around plus defensive center fielder. The Rangers haven’t had that maybe since Craig Gentry came through the system.

Cons

While he has “survived” offensively to this point, he hasn’t really thrived. He’s a contact hitter, but too much of that contact was weak. And as he tried to hit with a little more power last year, his strikeout rate jumped from 17 to 21%. Because of his athleticism and raw tools, there is belief he will eventually develop into an average hitter, maybe even with a bit of power. For now, though, that is all projection. If he’s an elite defender with below-average offensive capabilities, he’s probably an extra outfielder. If the hitting tool develops, he can be part of the spine of a contending team.

Second opinion

"Don’t sleep on Taveras. His athleticism/defense and feel to hit will allow him to have a strong career. Don’t be surprised if you see a power spike as he matures and after he gets to the Titleists in major league ballparks.” — AL scout.

The Rangers’ top 20 prospects

No. 20: SS Chris Seise

No. 19: RHP Demarcus Evans

No. 18: RHP Tyler Phillips

No. 17: SS Luisangel Acuña

No. 16: C David Garcia

No. 15: SS Osleivis Basabe

No. 14: 3B Davis Wendzel

No. 13: RHP Jonathan Hernandez

No. 12: INF Anderson Tejeda

No. 11: RHP Ronny Henriquez

No. 10: LHP Joe Palumbo

No. 9: RHP Hans Crouse

No. 8: SS Maximo Acosta

No. 7: 3B Sherten Apostel

No. 6: RHP Ricky Vanasco

No. 5: RHP Cole Winn

No. 4: INF-OF Nick Solak

No. 3: CF Leody Taveras

No. 2: C Sam Huff

No. 1: 3B Josh Jung

Find more Rangers stories from The Dallas Morning News here.