Lady Gaga, Paul McCartney, Lizzo, Billie Eilish, Stevie Wonder and John Legend are bringing the star power to a "virtual global special" honoring health care workers during the coronavirus pandemic.

The World Health Organization (WHO) and Global Citizen will present "One World: Together at Home” live across multiple TV networks on April 18, they announced Monday. Late-night TV hosts Stephen Colbert Stephen Tyrone ColbertThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Will Trump's plan to reopen the economy work? The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump may exert unprecedented power on nominees The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump: Tough times but progress being made MORE, Jimmy Fallon and Jimmy Kimmel James (Jimmy) Christian KimmelThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump may exert unprecedented power on nominees The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump: Tough times but progress being made Lady Gaga, WHO announce 'One World: Together at Home' TV special MORE — who appear on competing networks — will join forces to host the international special.

Among those tapped to appear: Alanis Morisette, Green Day's Billie Joe Armstrong, Coldplay's Chris Martin, opera singer Andrea Bocelli, soccer star David Beckham, Eddie Vetter, Finneas, J Balvin, country singers Kacey Musgraves and Keith Urban and actresses Kerry Washington and Priyanka Chopra Jonas. Actor Idris Elba, who revealed last month that he had tested positive for COVID-19, will also appear.

ADVERTISEMENT

"We need to tell the stories of and celebrate the front line community, health care workers, and their acts of kindness," Gaga said as she appeared remotely during a Monday WHO news briefing to announce the event.

"We want to highlight the gravity of this historical, unprecedented, cultural moment," added the "Stupid Love" singer, whom the WHO credited with helping to curate the musical lineup. "We want to celebrate and encourage the power of the human spirit."

The 34-year-old Grammy Award winner clarified that the TV spectacle will not be a benefit concert: "I would like to also let you know that this broadcast special is not actually a fundraiser. We all wanted to raise the money before we went on air."

Gaga said she had spent the week culling $35 million in donations from corporations, tech companies and philanthropists for the WHO's COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund to fight the coronavirus, which will go towards "essential [personal protective equipment], supplies, and testing kits around the world, and will help improve lab capacity."

Saying her heart was both "achy and warm" for the world's doctors and nurses, Gaga said, "Put your wallets away, put your credit cards away, and sit back and enjoy the show that you very much deserve."