White House economic adviser Larry Kudlow Lawrence (Larry) Alan KudlowMORE slammed U.S. senators who allegedly traded stock before a massive coronavirus outbreak in the United States during a tele-town hall hosted by Arizona Sen. Martha McSally Martha Elizabeth McSallyThe Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day The Hill's Campaign Report: Warren throws her support behind Biden MORE (R) Thursday evening.

“If it is proven that they’ve done something illegal or unethical, they will have to be significantly punished,” Kudlow said. “I don’t put up with any of that nonsense.”

Last month, financial disclosures allegedly revealed Sens. Richard Burr Richard Mauze BurrGOP Rep. Gaetz pays campaign donor for office space despite House rules: report Analysis shows Burr had middling success as stock picker before recent .7M sell-off New ad targets McConnell's 'culture of corruption' amid coronavirus pandemic MORE (R-N.C.), Kelly Loeffler Kelly LoefflerTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day New ad targets McConnell's 'culture of corruption' amid coronavirus pandemic MORE (R-Ga.), James Inhofe James (Jim) Mountain InhofeNew ad targets McConnell's 'culture of corruption' amid coronavirus pandemic Kudlow slams senators who allegedly traded stock before pandemic House Republicans threaten pushback on Saudi Arabia amid oil market slump MORE (R-Okla.) and Dianne Feinstein Dianne Emiel FeinsteinDemocrats request probe of Barr's remarks on firing of intelligence community IG The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (D-Calif.) sold hundreds of thousands of dollars in stocks within days of the Senate holding a briefing on Jan. 24 with administration officials on the coronavirus outbreak. Both Inhofe and Feinstein later said that they were not present at the briefing.

ADVERTISEMENT

After facing multiple calls for his resignation — including from conservative commentator Tucker Carlson Tucker CarlsonRoger Stone heads to Tucker Carlson's program after gag order lifted Sen. Kennedy: World economy will collapse if US is not reopened Fox's Tucker Carlson presses NJ governor on whether restrictions violate Bill of Rights MORE — Burr called for an ethics investigation into his own stock trading.

Kudlow, a former Wall Street economist and Reagan staffer, said that if the senators partook in illicit trading, the they should be disciplined.

“In our great system of free enterprise, you have to play by the rules; everybody has to play by the rules ... we all have to play by the rules, and if not we’ll have to face the consequences,” he said.

McSally agreed with the White House economist.

“Larry, I couldn’t agree with you more. If these allegations are true, they need to be held accountable,” McSally said.

On Tuesday, it was reported Georgia Sen. David Perdue (R) purchased stock in a company that produces personal protective equipment as the coronavirus pandemic began to spread in the U.S. However, an official for Perdue said that he was not at the Jan. 24 briefing, and mentioned that the senator has not been involved in his personal finances since taking office.

Updated 9:51 p.m.