This has been the whispered “worry” of some ; America is not ready, how can he manage homophobia that is a reality in this country ? Will he retreat or stay firm and poised. Well as it has been Reported yesterday in Iowa he has the chance to make me, as a out Latino Catholic gay man, pretty fucking great and proud

In an event where hecklers invoked Aodoma and Gomorrah this happened

Buttigieg is gay and has talked openly about his Episcopalian faith. The Democratic presidential candidate sought to dispatch the disruptions without attacking the demonstrators, but did acknowledge the disturbances and, at one point, the fact that the men had the right to voice their opinion. "The good news is, the condition of my soul is in the hands of God but the Iowa Caucuses are up to you," Buttigieg said

¡Amén!

He Aknowledged that IA was one of th3 first to make marriage equality legal 10 yees ago.

I know many don’t like his PERSONAL relationship with his faith and being vocal about in, I find it refreshing as I never thought I would. Being raised Catholic , have lived in a ver socially conservative south American country (Chile) during my late teens and 20s, sometimes you don’t realize the 5hings that make you you until you see them reflected in public figures.

‘The other hecklers

The first disruption came in Fort Dodge, Iowa, where a man at the roughly 100-person event stood up and yelled, "We will not stop, he is misleading our children."

The man was shouted down by the audience and once he was removed from the event, Buttigieg said, "We are so dug in in such passionate ways."

"That gentleman believes that what he is doing is in line with the will of the creator," he said. "I view it differently. We ought to be able to view it differently."

How many of my queer friends can relate to this feeling before embracing the beautiful person God made me and put me in Earth for

Buttigieg came out in 2015, months before he was re-elected as South Bend's mayor. He has talked about the fact that he was uncomfortable with being gay early in his life and told an audience at an LGBTQ event earlier this month that "if you had shown me exactly what it was that made me gay, I would have cut it out with a knife." He added later: "Thank God there was no pill. Thank God there was no knife."

Gracias Señor Alcalde, my heart is little bit bigger today.