Texas’ unemployment rate jumped in March to its highest level in three years as the economic toll of pandemic restrictions enacted in the state’s major counties begin to be revealed.

The state lost nearly 51,000 jobs last month, bringing an end to Texas’ 117-month streak of job creation, according to U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics data released Friday. By comparison, the state added almost 17,000 jobs in February.

The job losses pushed the unemployment rate from 3.5% in February to 4.7% in March. The last time it was that high was February 2017 — a ripple from the impact of the state’s 2015-16 oil bust.

In 2019, Texas employers added almost 1,000 new jobs each day — the capper on a decade-long expansion replete with company relocations and an abundance of capital investment.

That economic momentum, described by economists last summer as “red hot,” has taken an unprecedented tumble backward since coronavirus mitigation measures were implemented statewide in late March and early April.

March’s unemployment rate jump is just the tip of the iceberg, said Pia Orrenius, senior economist at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.

“Nothing compares to where we’re headed,” she said. “It’s going to be far worse.”

The Fed’s modeling projects Texas’ jobless rate could rise to at least 12% in April. “That’s not the peak,” Orrenius said.

“It’s all non-essential business that were hit first. But then what happens is ... the damage spreads,” she said. “It begins with the hotels and restaurants and arts and recreation. And then within two weeks, it’s in manufacturing, health care, retail. It’s in all the other sectors as well.”

More than 1,800 layoffs at Dallas-Fort Worth companies were detailed in notices filed in March with the Texas Workforce Commission. Most were in the restaurant and hotel industries, which bore the initial economic pain.

In the five weeks since stay-at-home orders went into effect in mid-March, more than 1.2 million Texans have filed initial claims for unemployment pay — numbers the state has never seen before.

During a Dallas Regional Chamber conference call earlier this week, Waco economist Ray Perryman acknowledged that comparisons are difficult because of this downturn’s suddenness and breadth. He said the state’s total job loss in the 2008 recession was 400,000 — only a third of the current five-week total for initial jobless claims.

It took 58 months for the economy to get back to even after the financial crisis, Perryman said. He predicted a recovery this time will resemble more of a hockey stick or checkmark, rather than being U-shaped or V-shaped.

He also said the North Texas region’s economic diversity should help it recover more quickly.

On Friday, Texas Gov. Greg Abbott announced a plan to begin lifting coronavirus restrictions, beginning with allowing retailers to perform “to go” ordering and loosening the elective surgery ban on health care providers that’s led to furloughs and layoffs.

“Anything we can do that keeps people safe and that offers the opportunity for businesses to start getting back is good,” Orrenius said. “It’s not going to make a huge difference, but there is a big difference between closing your business and being able to open at least partially in some form or fashion.”

How long will Texas’ job losses go on? Orrenius sees the third quarter of this year — July through September — as a potential turning point.

“We’re not going to be made whole, but we should at least stop losing jobs,” she said.