Now Playing:

Alana Mallen, a Noe Valley resident, used to enjoy her shopping outings, a leisurely activity she’d do once a week. But on Tuesday, the day a shelter in place order went into effect in San Francisco, she couldn’t find a single cart at her local Safeway. The 75-year-old left after buying a few items, resigned to uncertainty about how she would get the rest.

“I’ve never had to competitively shop before,” Mallen said. “There were a lot of people, more than usual, and I couldn’t find what I needed. It was overwhelming, so I left.”

It’s experiences like this retailers and grocers are hoping to lessen.

Some retailers and grocery stores are setting aside special hours for seniors, loosely defined to mean people 60 and older, and other vulnerable shoppers, to give them a better chance of buying food and other necessities instead of meeting long lines and empty shelves as panic buying continues amid the coronavirus spread.

For weeks, shelves have been wiped clean as shoppers stock up on supplies. This week, Bay Area counties issued an order asking residents to stay inside their homes and away from others as much as possible, in a desperate attempt to curb the spread of the virus. The move has upended lives as schools close, mass work from home ensues, and “nonessential” businesses shutter — for at least the next three weeks.

Back to Gallery Bay Area coronavirus shutdown: Stores are setting aside... 7 1 of 7 Photo: Jim Gensheimer / Special to The Chronicle 2 of 7 Photo: Jim Gensheimer / Special to The Chronicle 3 of 7 Photo: Jim Gensheimer / Special to The Chronicle 4 of 7 Photo: Jim Gensheimer / Special to The Chronicle 5 of 7 Photo: Jim Gensheimer / Special to The Chronicle 6 of 7 Photo: Jim Gensheimer / Special to The Chronicle 7 of 7 Photo: Jim Gensheimer / Special to The Chronicle













On Thursday, all Safeways in the Bay Area officially kicked off senior hour. Parent company Albertsons, which also owns Andronico’s and Vons, said all its stores across brands would be open two hours before normal business hours (7 to 9 a.m.) Tuesdays and Thursdays, for seniors and other at-risk populations such as pregnant women and those with compromised immune systems, to shop.

To enforce the special hours, Albertsons is asking other customers to not infringe on the set-aside hours.

“We are asking that our customers help us reserve this shopping time for those most at risk in our communities,” Vivek Sankaran, chief executive of Albertsons, said in a statement.

Other national chains are doing the same. Whole Foods said Tuesday it would carve out an hour for at-risk populations to shop, every day, for the next few weeks. For example, if a Whole Foods is operating from 9 a.m. to 8 p.m., vulnerable shoppers can begin shopping at 8 a.m. Target and Walmart have announced similar measures.

Some local grocers, including Zanotto’s Markets in San Jose, are doing so as well. Canyon Market in San Francisco’s Glen Park neighborhood has announced seniors-only shopping hours from 7 to 8 a.m. daily. Piedmont Grocery in Oakland will begin setting aside hours for customers older than 65 from 9 to 10 a.m. Sunday. Regular store hours are 10 a.m. to 7 p.m. The store will be temporarily closed on Thursdays.

“A lot of our customers are in the older age range,” said Amy Pence, vice president at Piedmont Grocery. “We have a number of retirement communities nearby, and this was a no-brainer. It’s the right thing to do.”

Besides food access, the steps taken by the stores are also a way to provide a safer environment for at-risk populations. Older adults and people with underlying health issues have higher risks of bad outcomes if they contract COVID-19, experts say. While the best scenario is for seniors to have friends and families shop for them, for people like Mallen who live alone, it’s easier said than done.

“This is a good move by stores. It’s more dangerous for seniors to be around younger people who may be sick but may not show symptoms,” said Robert Siegel, a professor of microbiology and immunology at Stanford University.

Seniors are at more risk being with younger people than with other seniors, assuming the other seniors aren’t sick already, Siegel added.

Now Playing:

Instead of hundreds of people going in and out of stores all day, setting time aside for seniors in the morning is a good move as it lessens the chances of contracting the virus, said George Rutherford, professor of epidemiology at UCSF.

“Older people are not at higher risk of contracting the coronavirus, but they are at a higher risk of bad outcomes if they get it,” Rutherford said.

But because there is no way for stores to verify if some among those vulnerable people are sick, having high-risk populations all together at the same time could be a disaster, experts say.

There are other options. Stores like Zanotto’s are offering curbside pickup.

“We’re doing at least 30 (curbside pickups) a day and we’re prepared for an increase,” said Jessica Zanotto, social media manager at Zanotto’s. “We’re telling more customers to do more of this because it’s the least form of contact for them.”

Seniors can also order takeout from restaurants, and if they qualify, they can sign up for Meals on Wheels or food delivery services such as DoorDash or Sun Basket. They can also call food banks.

For Mallen, she’s getting offers on Nextdoor, a neighborhood app, from people willing to shop for her.

“When people ask me if I need help, I almost want to say, ‘Yes, would you like to be old for me?’” she laughed. “The kindness of strangers has been tremendous these last few days.”

Shwanika Narayan is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: shwanika.narayan@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @shwanika