401-room W Hotel San Francisco temporarily closes due to lack of demand A disturbing sign of the times

Marriott's 401-room W Hotel San Francisco is temporarily closing due to lack of demand amid coronavirus fears Marriott's 401-room W Hotel San Francisco is temporarily closing due to lack of demand amid coronavirus fears Photo: Marriott Photo: Marriott Image 1 of / 14 Caption Close 401-room W Hotel San Francisco temporarily closes due to lack of demand 1 / 14 Back to Gallery

The W Hotel San Francisco, located next door to the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art and across from the Moscone Convention Center, is temporarily closing its doors at midnight tonight due to lack of demand brought on by the coronavirus crisis. A Marriott spokesperson confirmed the closure but could not offer more details.

At this time it is unknown when the hotel will re-open. However, checking the hotel website for reservations, all rooms show as "sold out" through April 30, but are available on May 1 starting at $274 per night.

The 31-floor, 401-room hotel opened in 1999 on the corner of Howard Street and Third Street in the South of Market or SOMA district of San Francisco. It is part of the giant Marriott family of hotels.

As the travel demand plummets, this will likely not be the first big San Francisco hotel to temporarily shutter. Today, the American Hotel and Lodging Association said, "In certain affected markets, including Seattle, San Francisco, Austin and Boston, hotel occupancy rates are already down below 20 percent and individual hotels and major operators have already shut down operations."

The hotel industry expects 1 million U.S. jobs have already been eliminated or will be in the next few weeks.

Already, there are plenty of ideas about what to do with the hotel, such as this tweet from SF Supervisor Matt Haney:

Use as a shelter for the unhoused?



This is one of many hotels that will close. The state has the power to use these hotels to house the homeless.



I’ve reached out to Dept of Homelessness about hotels and bringing this up today at Board Meeting. https://t.co/68uBR1fC2W — Matt Haney (@MattHaneySF) March 17, 2020

Read all recent TravelSkills posts here.

Chris McGinnis is SFGATE's senior travel correspondent. You can reach him via email or follow him on Twitter or Facebook. Don't miss a shred of important travel news by signing up for his FREE biweekly email updates!

SFGATE participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites.