SALT LAKE CITY — Rudy Gobert and Donovan Mitchell were cleared by the Utah Department of Health and no longer pose any risk of transmission of the coronavirus to others as of Friday, the Utah Jazz announced.

Gobert was the first NBA player to publicly test positive for COVID-19 on March 11, with his test results coming back just moments before the Jazz were supposed to tip off against the Thunder in Oklahoma City.

Though Gobert was not with the team at the arena, the game was called off, the NBA season suspended and the rest of the Jazz players and staff were tested before leaving the arena that night. Mitchell’s positive test results came back the following morning.

The entire Jazz team and staff, regardless of their prior testing status, were all cleared by the Department of Health Friday after completing a mandated two-week quarantine period following their exposure to the coronavirus, having been in contact with either Gobert or Mitchell.

“In accordance with CDC and NBA recommendations, all players and staff will continue to practice social distancing while limiting time outside their homes to essential activities,” the Jazz said.

To date, Gobert is the only member of the Jazz to have reported symptoms of the coronavirus. He was symptomatic before being tested in Oklahoma City, and as recently as Sunday was experiencing symptoms. He posted on Twitter Sunday afternoon saying he had lost his sense of smell, a symptom now associated with the virus.

Just to give you guys an update, loss of smell and taste is definitely one of the symptoms, haven’t been able to smell anything for the last 4 days. Anyone experiencing the same thing? — Rudy Gobert (@rudygobert27) March 22, 2020

Mitchell, who was asymptomatic despite his positive test, was grateful for the news that he had been cleared and was no longer at risk of infecting others, and took to Twitter to celebrate posting a GIF of a child standing on a chair dancing.

A few hours later, Mitchell posted another tweet in which he wrote, “On a more serious note...let’s continue to practice social distancing and remember...even though you may not have symptoms you still may be infected!!! Let’s keep everyone in our prayers and stay safe.”

He closed the tweet with a heart emoji and the praying hands emoji.

On a more serious note... let’s continue to practice social distancing and remember... even though you may not have symptoms you still may be infected!! Let’s keep everyone in our prayers and stay safe❤️ — Donovan Mitchell (@spidadmitchell) March 27, 2020

While the rest of the team has also been cleared by the Department of Health, they, like everyone, are still at risk for becoming infected, so distancing and preventative measures will still be taken.

Additionally, all NBA practice gyms and facilities still remain closed indefinitely and all players have been asked to stay home as much as possible.

Members of Jazz organization will continue to distance themselves from others and follow the same guidelines as everyone else moving forward.