Finally, some good news from City Hall. Social-distance bicycle riding is OK. It’s just as OK as solo walking, hiking or jogging.

At first, City Hall listed cycling among the banned nonessential forms of travel, even though exercise is encouraged. Fortunately, after thinking it over, City Hall realized that cycling involves exercise. Go ahead and bike ride, said the authorities, just don’t congregate.

For cycling in San Francisco, it’s hard to beat the 10-mile loop that starts at Stern Grove and includes the zoo, beach and Golden Gate Park.

You get dogs to play with, zoo animals to peek at, beach sand to wiggle your toes in, a windmill to stand beneath, a sculpture garden to ponder and a novelty store window full of joy buzzers and squirting nickels guaranteed to cheer up a city full of freshly minted shut-ins.

Much of it is downhill, except for the parts that aren’t. Those build character.

Start at Stern Grove, with its dogs. You have to stay 6 feet away from the people with dogs and you probably should stay 6 feet away from the dogs. But admiring the dogs is OK. It’s always possible to learn things from dogs, who have a fine time even when humans are fretting. And if a dog drops a tennis ball at your feet, as Leo did, you can kick the tennis ball. Leo brought it back and I kicked it again. Leo and I had a great time playing hands-off fetch until Leo’s owner said, from a safe distance, that it was time for Leo to go home.

Leo’s owner waved goodbye. Everybody is waving these days. Cyclists are waving at fellow cyclists. In normal times, some cyclists wave and some cyclists don’t. These days, everybody is waving or calling out good wishes. Cyclists, pedestrians, dog walkers, roller skaters, hikers, skateboarders, all 6 feet apart, all waving. Good wishes carry farther than the virus does.

A mile west, and all downhill, is the San Francisco Zoo. It’s closed, but the animals are still inside and if you’re resourceful, you can take a peek.

Near the intersection of Skyline Boulevard and Herbst Road, you can pull over to the fence and get a glimpse of the peccaries, also known as skunk pigs. The two skunk pigs who were out and about were not standing 6 feet apart from each other but sniffing one another in a manner suggesting they are on good terms. From a spot not far away you can view the swans gliding in the lake by the kiddie train.

A visit to the zoo usually costs $22. Admiring the skunk pigs and swans is free.

Standing by the chain-link fence, peeking in, may not be for everyone. But it appears to be legal. A nearby sign says: “No soliciting, loitering or trespassing.” But it’s not loitering to look at a skunk pig. It’s not trespassing to look from outside the fence at a skunk pig. And nobody would want to solicit a skunk pig except another skunk pig.

Proceed west on Sloat Boulevard until you can go no farther. The big blue thing is the Pacific Ocean. It’s open for business. Take your shoes off and stroll on the sand of Ocean Beach, a good thing to do during pandemics and other times.

At Sloat and Great Highway is a public restroom, one of the few establishments allowed to remain open. Good thing you brought some sanitary wipes.

Proceed north on Great Highway. Usually a cyclist will take the multipurpose path that parallels Great Highway. During the pandemic, cyclists should ride on the shoulder of Great Highway instead. On the path, oncoming cyclists and pedestrians pass closer than 6 feet. Solo cycling is only OK if cyclists stay solo.

Now Playing:

At Lincoln Way, the loop is half done. Pedal into Golden Gate Park and head for the Murphy Windmill, largest of its kind in the world. Its fantail spins even when the four large vanes don’t. The wind, like the ocean and the dogs, possesses therapeutic properties during pandemics. Spend a few moments watching the fantail going around. You have something more pressing to do at home?

Proceed east through the park on Kennedy Drive past the bison, or on the bike path alongside Hellman Hollow, site of the Hardly Strictly Bluegrass Festival. The bison and the festival, two noble San Francisco institutions, will go on. For the time being, take a break on one of the picnic tables on the giant greensward and imagine watching Emmylou Harris on the big stage that isn’t there right now. While sitting on the picnic table with the great meadow all to yourself, you can listen to webcasts of past Hardly Strictly concerts without crawling over fellow festivalgoers, around their blankets and through their clouds of roll-your-own smoke.

The picnic table is a great place for the picnic you remembered to pack for yourself. Nothing wrong with an apple, a piece of cheese and a cookie, even without company.

At the museum concourse, take a moment to gaze at the newly installed giant Ferris wheel, then stroll with your bike through the Marcus sculpture garden at the east side of the de Young art museum. The museum, being indoors, is closed. But its sculpture garden isn’t. There are bronze sculptures of a cave man, two penguins and a girl riding a seahorse bareback. The sign says the girl riding the seahorse is Neptune’s daughter, but you need not read the sign to enjoy a sculpture of a girl riding a seahorse.

Exit the park on Ninth Avenue and pay a quick stop at the display window of the Misdirections magic and novelty shop. Behind the glass are dozens of gag items and goofy essentials — joy buzzers, squirting nickels, exploding chewing gum, floating eyeballs, fake fried eggs. They’re locked up now, but they won’t always be. Like the Pacific Ocean, a joy buzzer has possibilities and surprises.

Proceed via the Seventh Avenue bike lane and Dewey and Claremont boulevards to West Portal Avenue, one of the great shopping streets of San Francisco. The theater, restaurants, florist, shoemaker and the Goodwill store aren’t going anyplace. Patience is called for. Keep heading west and there you are, back at Stern Grove with an entirely new set of dogs and their tennis balls.

Steve Rubenstein is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: srubenstein@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @SteveRubeSF