Reddit Email 16K Shares

Russia’s President Vladimir Putin has claimed that Russian satellites have captured evidence that the recent spate of hurricanes that have devastated the US and surrounding nations, was engineered by people working inside the United States Government.

Speaking ahead of his meeting with Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri in the Russian Black Sea city of Sochi, Mr. Putin became frustrated and appeared to go off-script when questioned about aid to Cuba and the Caribbean following Hurricane Irma.

When asked by a Russian reporter if he planned on pledging funds to the relief effort on behalf of his nation, he said, “the men in dark suits seem to have that all planned out”.

When pushed to elaborate, he went into more detail, saying: “We won’t send Russian money to clean up the mess that was engineered by oligarchs in the West.”

The destruction caused by those storms was planned, from the beginning, by those who operate in the shadows, deep within the US Government.”

When asked if he was saying that the hurricanes happened as a result of Donald Trump backing out of the Paris Climate Agreement, he continued with his emotionally charged rant, saying: “It’s related to climate change, but not in that way.”

Trump is a very smart man, I’m sure he has figured it out, but it, most likely, has nothing to do with him.”Russian satellites captured those hurricanes being made with machines.”

They didn’t occur naturally, they are another rich man’s game.”Convincing the public climate change is real does two things: It undermines their leader and keeps the money flowing.”Now Cuba needs aid relief, and the US will come to the rescue.”

Cuba will be in debt to the US and soon there will be US dollars flowing through IMF-controlled Cuban banks.”Mr. Putin’s microphone appeared to suffer a technical fault shortly before a member of his press team called him away.

Mainstream Media BlackoutAlthough mainstream media’s main focus has been on the devastation in Florida, it has failed report that Cuba has been completely destroyed by severe flooding as 5 feet of water completely engulfs low lying parts of Havana.

As Irma continues to claim the lives of Cubans, within the 72 hours time frame it took the storm to destroy the country, it has now damaged every region on the island nation leaving the beautiful and historic district underwater.

Why was Cuba hit the hardest?

As recent investigations point out that hurricanes are “man made”, it wouldn’t make sense for the US to destroy their own country, but Cuba is another case entirely.

In June, President Donald Trump vowed to treat Cuban government with hostility as he announced that trade and travel restrictions would be implemented in the country.“I am canceling the last administration’s completely one-sided deal with Cuba,” Trump confirmed.

“They made a deal with a government that spread violence and instability in the region and nothing they got, think about it, nothing they got, they fought for everything and we just didn’t fight hard enough, but now, those days are over.”

Cuba is also one of the few last remaining nations left in the world without a Rothschild-controlled central bank.Other countries on that list include North Korea, Iran, and Syria, all of whom have something in common: They are enemies of the US.

Making “hurricanes with machines” may sound like something from a science fiction movie, but engineering storms through artificial weather modification are nothing new.

One of the world’s leading scientists, Dr. Michio Kaku, recently let slip on live TV that Governments have had the ability to create hurricanes, earthquakes, tsunamis and major flooding for years.

During an interview on mainstream media outlet CBS news, Kaku said that secret government weather modification programs have successfully created hurricanes by spraying the skies with nano particles and storms and then “activating” storms using “lasers”.

Government-funded programs such as the High-Frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP) was created in the early 1990s and was an ionospheric research program jointly funded by the U.S. Air Force, the U.S. Navy, the University of Alaska Fairbanks, and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).

HAARP was capable of “weaponizing” the weather and has the ability of potentially triggering floods, droughts, hurricanes, and earthquakes. Throughout the life of the program, it had incurred around $250 million in tax-funded construction and operating costs.