(Third Man) Drink, depression and pedal steel all make their presence felt on the Nashville singer’s wry and charming second set

Midwest Farmer’s Daughter, Margo Price’s 2016 debut, was one of those rare country records that reminded outsiders that the genre of rhinestones and melodies could still throw out plenty of grit. It established Price as a penetrating new voice, drawing on her own heart-rending tribulations – poverty, jail, bereavement – and railing against fate and the sexual politics of Nashville, where Price had long toiled unrecognised.

Price was only getting started, it turns out. All American Made finds her tour-honed band fleshing out 12 new songs in which errant lovers, “cocaine cowboys”, and double standards get it in the neck. All of this is delivered with upbeat charm and wry humour; pedal steel solos don’t so much sweeten these pills as dunk them in a vat of serotonin.

Price’s commitment to country finds room for forays into other genres too. A bit of Memphis soul creeps into the magnificent A Little Pain (“a little pain never hurt anyone” could well be the most country statement ever sung), while Cocaine Cowboys starts with a faint reggae gait. “The boys ’round here, well, they talk too fast,” Price notes of those hangers-on who ride the other kind of rails.

Price isn’t just down on them – she’s hard on her own chemical crutches as well. Intoxicants feature throughout – it’s Jack Daniels and speed on Wild Women, Beaujolais and gin elsewhere. “Sometimes the whiskey does me right and sometimes it does me in,” she notes on Weakness. “Sometimes my weakness is stronger than me.”

Margo Price: ‘Country music is about divorce, drinking and jail’ Read more

If reckonings with fate are a theme of Price’s music, the spectre of depression flits around its edges. On Learning to Lose, a tremendous duet with Willie Nelson, the two acknowledge the enemy that lives in your own mind; Nelson adds a magnificent guitar solo.

Price’s family – the subject of one of Midwest Farmer’s Daughter’s saddest tunes, Hands of Time – gets another cameo. Here, Price’s uncle started drinking “when the bank denied the loan/ Now it’s liver failure and his mad cow’s being cloned,” she aches on the closing title track that wonders whether America’s problems might be “all American-made”. And if sexism and poverty weren’t sufficiently political targets, Price has some choice words about the foreign policy of the 80s White House.

You reap what you sow: Reagan was selling weapons to the leaders of Iran in the 80s. “I was just a child,” she sings, “unaware of the effects/ Raised on sports and Jesus and all the usual suspects.”

For a rearward-facing genre, country has long had a proud tradition in which forthright women call out sexism; here Price sounds more like Dolly Parton than anyone else. Pay Gap boggles hard at financial inequity, with Price’s iron fist clad in a velvety smooth, tuneful glove. Many dots are being joined on this song and this album; that those who are hard done by, tend to be hard done by “rich white men”.