Severe storms are likely Sunday across the Gulf Coast states, the Storm Prediction Center said.

Adding to the danger is that some of the tornadoes could be wrapped in rain or may occur after dark.

Looking ahead, additional rounds of severe weather are anticipated for the South in the coming weeks.

A week after the deadly and devastating Easter Sunday tornado outbreak, another round of severe weather is forecast for Sunday across portions of the South.

Severe storms are most likely Sunday across the Gulf Coast states, the Storm Prediction Center said. "The greatest threat appears to be from Louisiana to Georgia, with significant severe storms expected including tornadoes and damaging winds. Large hail is likely as well," the center warned.

Adding to the danger will be the risk that some of the tornadoes could be wrapped in rain or may occur after dark, AccuWeather said.

Cities within the greatest risk area include Baton Rouge, Louisiana; Jackson, Mississippi; and Montgomery and Mobile, Alabama. Big cities like New Orleans, Houston and Atlanta could also see powerful storms.

Drenching rain will accompany the severe weather, especially in portions of central Alabama and central Georgia, where flash flooding is possible, the National Weather Service said.

However, the overall setup does not look as favorable for as numerous and intense tornadoes as was seen across the South on Easter Sunday and Monday, the Weather Channel said.

During last week's outbreak, more than 100 tornadoes struck the South, killing at least 36 people, the National Weather Service said.

Looking ahead, additional rounds of severe weather are anticipated for the South in the coming weeks, AccuWeather said.

"In terms of severe weather and tornado risk, the overall weather pattern is loaded for the rest of April and into May," Paul Pastelok, AccuWeather's top long-range forecaster, said.Rebuilding during a pandemic:She barely left her home to stay safe from coronavirus — then a tornado destroyed it