Nancy Pelosi showing "The Late, Late Show" audience her freezer. (Screen Capture)

Appearing on “The Late, Late Show With James Corden” earlier this week, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, broadcasting from the kitchen in her home, showed the host a freezer full of Jeni’s ice cream, a brand that advertises pints-by-mail for $12 a piece.

“This is, this is something you can get through the mail if you run out. May I show you?” Pelosi asked Corden just before she pulled open her freezer.

“Yes, absolutely,” said Corden.

When she pulled open the freezer it turned out to be packed with packages of Jeni’s ice cream.

“Since you’ve been isolating in your house, how much of your regular diet do you think is ice cream and candy?” asked Corden.

“Well, as much as possible,” said Pelosi. “I enjoy it. I like it better than anything else.

“And I don’t know why, but it seems to agree with me,” Pelosi said. “I have a lot of energy and we just got it restocked, the ice cream, for Easter Sunday, because, shall we say, we were enjoying.

“I don’t know what I would have done were ice cream not invented,” said Pelosi. “I just wonder.”

On its website, Jeni’s advertises pints of multiple flavors of ice cream for $12 per pint.

This is a screen capture from the "Order Online" section of the Jeni's website.

“Jeni’s is a Certified B Corporation endorsed by the international nonprofit B Lab as a company that meets rigorous standards of social and environmental performance, accountability, and transparency,” says the Jeni’s website.

“Using Direct Trade ingredients, employing a diverse team of people, working with women- and minority-owned businesses—it’s all part of how we operate and an important part of our company culture,” it says.

“We build community wherever we go, from near our kitchen in Columbus, to the cities across the country where we have scoop shops,” it says. ‘Working with people we know and trust helps us get the best ingredients we can find. We’re proud to be a B Corp. It means we’re an evolving company—pushing forward to be better tomorrow than we are today.”

Here is a transcript of the part of The Late, Late Show where Pelosi shows Corden her freezer full of ice cream: