CLOSE Sears has filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, buckling under its massive debt load and staggering losses. The filing could affect tens of thousands of workers. (Oct. 15)

Amerco Real Estate, a unit of U-Haul International, has agreed to buy 13 Sears and Kmart stores. (Photo: Getty Images)

Hundreds of Sears and Kmart stores are being closed around the nation, but they won't all stay empty for long.

Amerco Real Estate, a unit of Phoenix-based U-Haul International, has tentatively agreed to buy 13 of those locations for $62 million from Sears Holdings Corp., pending Sears' bankruptcy court approval. U-Haul plans to transform them into facilities that customers can use to rent trucks, store belongings, buy moving supplies, attach hitches to their vehicles and more.

Twelve of the stores up for purchase by U-Haul are Kmarts; one is a Sears. None are in Arizona.

Refurbishing former big boxes

U-Haul has long practiced a strategy of buying and converting buildings, including many former big-box retail centers, into moving and storage centers.

"Our properties, across the U.S. and Canada, are of every shape, size and variety," said Jeff Lockridge, a U-Haul spokesman in Phoenix.

MORE: 5 Sears locations closing in Arizona, 3 in the Phoenix area

This "adaptive reuse" strategy cuts the amount of energy and materials needed for new construction, helps cities and towns reduce their inventory of unused buildings and minimizes the amount of renovation debris sent to landfills, he said.

Sebastien Reyes, U-Haul's vice president of communications, said the company looks forward to working further with Sears' real estate and legal teams in hopes of securing approval from the bankruptcy court for this transaction.

Local Sears closings

Sears Holdings, which filed for bankruptcy protection in October, has announced plans to close hundreds of Sears and Kmart locations nationally. In the Phoenix area, the list includes Sears stores at Chandler Fashion Center, Superstition Springs Center in Mesa, Desert Sky Mall and Metrocenter in Phoenix.

Sears Hometown and Outlet Stores, operated by a separate company, are not affected by the bankruptcy filing.

Reach the reporter at russ.wiles@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8616.

READ MORE:

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/money/business/consumers/2018/12/03/u-haul-subsidiary-amerco-real-estate-wants-buy-sears-kmart-stores/2192533002/