ROSE: So, what is the nature of this new fight? I think there’s really three stages. The first stage is you build out the capacity of your preexisting hospital, you find that conference room, you turn it into another hospital bed, you increase the number of staff, you increase the number of ventilators. You basically try to get that hospital to accomplish as much as possible. But that has a limit. Then we can go to the second stage, which is where we were [deployed], which is to basically establish ancillary facilities to those hospitals. But it has to be a real hospital. That is much more complicated than just building a bed. You have to bring in the hospital’s supply system, the hospital’s IT system, everything. So we set out over the course of 10 days or so to stand up a Covid-only facility. The goal was to seamlessly integrate this facility to the adjacent Staten Island University hospital system, which is part of the Northwell family. This was a psychiatric center. It had roughly 240 or so rooms. We couldn’t use the beds because the beds couldn’t incline. So we had to bring in 240 or so new beds. The psychiatric center wasn’t built for oxygen. So what do you do? And so the state stepped up and sent oxygen concentrators and you plug them into every room to where now you’re providing oxygen to every patient. Then you say, ‘OK, well, what else do we need?’ You need garbage cans in every room, you need surge protectors in every room. You need commodes, you need shower chairs. You bring the Northwell IT system over and you bring computers over and you integrate that. It’s well beyond just the conversation of how many beds do you have. We were standing up an integrated hospital, and to watch these folks do this, and do it quickly, and innovate on the fly—truly, truly awe-inspiring.

KRUSE: Two years ago, sitting in Jody’s Club Forest, we were drinking Bud Lights. And you said you wanted “Democrats to be Democrats again.” You said, “If you’re telling me you think government has a role for this country, then say it.” So here we are in April 2020. We’re in the midst of a pandemic and resulting economic devastation. What must government be and do in the months and years to come?

ROSE: Interesting to look back on that quote during a time like this. There’s a few things unequivocally that the federal government has to be doing. First off is taking over the production of critical medical supplies. We can analogize this with Iraq and Afghanistan, but the analogy is actually far more fitting to World War II. Total war. Taking over the production of PPE in every way, shape and form possible to make sure that states and municipalities aren’t fighting one another. That’s step one. Step two is not just restricting that to PPE but also pushing that to reagents, and laboratory equipment and antibodies, because it is going to take a critical federal governmental role to allow us to ease into an opening of the economy.