Editor’s note: Art and the City is a special project by The Dallas Morning News arts and entertainment staff. We asked more than 100 members of North Texas’ creative community to tell us in their own words how they are living life and making art during the great shutdown of 2020. We also asked artists to share a piece of work that is especially meaningful to them right now. You can contribute to this project by emailing us at artslife@dallasnews.com or share your work online with the hashtag #DFWArtMatters. We are sharing work weekly in our free Arts & Entertainment newsletter; sign up at join.dallasnews.com/newsletter.

Want to see more from Art and the City 2020? Check out the links below:

Works from other art disciplines will be published throughout the month of April. Check back to see even more!

‘All You’ve Ever Dreamed Of'

We have an album set to release April 17 through Cleopatra Records. A lot of the shows we booked to support the release of the album will be postponed because of the virus, but we’re staying optimistic. “All You’ve Ever Dreamed Of” is the first single, and we feel it’s some of our finest work. I started writing this song when I was on a Twin Peaks kick. I was captivated by the eeriness of the backwards scenes in the Black Lodge. I played on that inspiration by reversing some of the sax sections to garner a subtle darkness to the song. The song’s jubilant vibe is all a façade. The underlying lyrical content is from the devil’s perspective, bargaining for the listener’s soul in exchange for “All You’ve Ever Dreamed Of.” Much like the Faustian tale.

— Nite is a Dallas-based band consisting of twin brothers Kyle and Myles Mendes. Their new album, “Sleepless,” debuts April 17. nite.bandcamp.com.

Silver linings

Rhett Miller and the Old 97's performing in Dallas in 2014. (Jerry McClure / Special Contributor)

I’m spending most of my energy these days trying to find silver linings. One thing I’m noticing is that people seem to really be appreciating what contact they do have with others. The importance of family and loved ones gets thrown into starker relief by the isolated situation we find ourselves in these days.

There’s a song called “You Were a Stranger” on my most recent solo album, The Messenger. I never feel comfortable saying what a song is about, but my take on that song is that it’s about gratitude and how unlikely each beautiful little human connection is in this weird world.

Listen here on Spotify.

— Rhett Miller grew up in Dallas, is a songwriter and lead singer for the Old 97’s. rhettmiller.com.

Respect

Last month, I released “Respect,” a minimally produced, vocal-centric cover of Erasure’s late 1980s hit “A Little Respect.” Although the song is about a relationship between two people, the overarching message of respect is especially relevant during these extraordinary times — during this global pandemic where our thoughts and actions have a direct impact on those close to us and beyond, perhaps more than usual.

It’s not one of those situations where irresponsible actions will only hurt those who are being irresponsible. We’re seeing just how tied together we all really are, and hopefully understand the importance of respecting one another’s health and safety by doing our parts to slow down the pandemic. I’m hoping you can find some comfort in my version of the song.

Listen here on Spotify.

Listen here on Apple Music.

— Sudie is a Dallas-based singer and songwriter. sudiemusic.com.

Am I OK? Are you OK?

Rat Rios (Kathy Tran)

I released “Pretty Little Head” back in January. This song is for you, for me, for all of us finding ourselves or someone we love in that murky territory between stability and volatility. I say this all of the time, because it truly can’t be said enough: All may not, in fact, be fine with your loved ones underneath the pristine surface.

Depression is a deceptive parasite, infectious like a catchy beat, and, before you know it, you’re dancing away with yourself without really taking a moment to ask if everything is OK. Am I OK? Are you OK? Is she-he-they OK? I could have never predicted this pandemic we’re currently living in, and now I look back on this song with a kind of relevant horror. But this song’s agenda rings true now more than ever: Check in on your loved ones.

Listen here on Spotify.

— Sammy Rat Rios is a Dallas-based singer/songwriter and music producer.

This is a situation

Dallas-based musician Donovan Jones stands in front of Bunbury's Bar. His song entitled “Geraldine” embraces themes of hope and acceptance. (Supplied)

If you were to make a playlist for this challenging time, I would suggest a song called “Geraldine” from my album Elder Mantis. My initial concept was to compose a musically therapeutic album with a very specific mood. This song was untitled for a couple months until I went to New Braunfels with my best friend to visit her grandmother who was not doing well. We basically went there to say goodbye. While we were there I had the opportunity to play a track from my album and I chose this specific song because I thought it was the most appropriate for the situation. We were all trying to process these heavy emotions. And for me that day the song really became about acceptance. Geraldine was a badass from San Antonio. She owned a bar that only sold beer and pickled pigs feet. She drank vodka and water every night and would play spades with us until five in the morning. We all miss her and I guess this song is forever related to death for me. You can be sad and be hopeful, and eventually learn to accept a situation.

Listen here on Spotify.

Listen here on Bandcamp.

— Donovan Jones is a Dallas-based composer and performer who plays in the band Black Taffy.

From an isolated place

“New Years” is a song I wrote during a different kind of isolation, back in January 2018. I was in a deep phase of recovery, writing to make sense of my place in the world, and what the future looks like. It reads as an apology, a lament and a love song. The girl in the song begs for a release from the dark and for new beginnings.

— Lorelei K is a Denton-based singer/songwriter and poet. lorelei-k.bandcamp.com.

‘I’m Gonna Give You Anything’

I grew up loving spooky shows like The Twilight Zone and Goosebumps and this song of mine incorporates that vibe a bit. I wrote this song about the concept of people taking advantage or swindling people. Something everyone has experienced in some shape or form in their lifetime. This particular song involves the singing narration of a devil in a Southern swampy setting. I wanted the attitude to evoke mannerisms as if I was trying to be a salesman in the South with a little eerie added to the song. This song’s music video was fun to create. I wanted to give it a B-movie spooky vibe and it was fun going to the swamps of New Orleans and haunted hotels in North Texas like The Baker Hotel. One of my favorite songs to perform live as well.

Listen here on Spotify.

Listen here on Apple Music.

— Cody Lynn Boyd is a singer and songwriter based in Fort Worth.

‘Dream Up Something Big Tonight’

Lyrically it might seem a bit morose, but the overall idea is to imagine or create something wonderful despite being in a dark place.

Artists already have low periods where they struggle to create, but this world crisis has cast a bigger cloud. It’s more important than ever to try to dream of good things and a positive future right now.

Listen here on Bandcamp.

— Aaron Thedford is a member of the alternative band American Werewolf Academy.

Dallas Strong

My song, “Dallas,” featuring Calvin Taylor and produced by MouseQuake and Taylor Pace, is all about Dallas pride and represents how phenomenal we can be when we work together as a community. Dallas’ rich music history is featured in this song. Pace is the grandson of the late, great Johnnie Taylor, the first artist to be certified platinum in history. I am the son of the late, great Big Al of Nemesis, the first major rap group from Texas. With the assistance of Quake and Pace we created a blues, hip-hop mashup that is sure to brighten the dullest of days for any North Texan.

Listen here on Spotify.

— Rakim Al-Jabarr is a Dallas-based hip-hop artist.

Pandemic laments

I wrote “Some Blues” over a year ago with a very different world on my mind, and hadn’t touched it since. But last week, it sprang into my head during one of my little pandemic laments, and when I listened back, the lyrics took on a totally new light and a bizarre prescience.

I really, really love how one artwork can have one hundred different meanings, even to the artist herself. Art lives and breathes on its own. Also, there’s a Duke Ellington and John Coltrane reference tucked into this song that made me feel like a very clever girl.

— Teddy Georgia Waggy is a Dallas-based musician and fashion designer. teddygeorgiawaggy.bandcamp.com

Want a different tune? Find more pop music stories here.

Find the latest news on Coronavirus from The Dallas Morning News here.