SALT LAKE CITY — When it comes to Tyler Huntley, Utah offensive coordinator Andy Ludwig doesn’t mince any words.

“He’s the best quarterback I’ve ever coached,” said Ludwig, who has worked with signal-callers like David Carr, the No. 1 NFL pick in 2002, and Brian Johnson, the 2009 Sugar Bowl Most Outstanding Player.

“The guy is going to be an excellent pro,” Ludwig said. “He’s going to be an excellent professional quarterback.”

Huntley’s path to the NFL, though, has been anything but smooth. Despite earning first-team All-Pac 12 honors as a senior, Huntley wasn’t invited to the scouting combine, the slight despite earning co-Pac-12 Offensive Player of the Year recognition from The Associated Press and All-America accolades from Pro Football Focus. He was a finalist for the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm and Manning awards, participated in the East-West Shrine Bowl, was second in the country in completion percentage (.731) and ranked among the national leaders in pass efficiency (177.6 rating), as well as passing yards per attempt (10.27) and completion (14.05).

“Whoever takes him or whatever camp he gets into, they’re going to be pleasantly surprised because he’s a fierce competitor and like I said I think he is not getting the recognition that he deserves.” — Utah coach Kyle Whittingham, on Tyler Huntley

It wasn’t enough, though, to get Huntley a spot in the combine — even though five other Pac-12 quarterbacks participated — Jacob Eason (Washington), Anthony Gordon (Washington State), Justin Herbert (Oregon), Jake Luton (Oregon State) and Steven Montez (Colorado).

“I think people are missing the boat on Tyler. I was hoping he would get an invite to the combine, didn’t happen — at least he got to play in those all-star games,” said Utah coach Kyle Whittingham. “Whoever takes him or whatever camp he gets into, they’re going to be pleasantly surprised because he’s a fierce competitor and like I said I think he is not getting the recognition that he deserves.”

Huntley capped his time with the Utes as the school record-holder in career completion percentage (.672), single-season completion percentage (.730), pass efficiency (177.55 rating), yards per completion (14.1) and total offense per play (8.3 yards).

“His success has almost nothing to do with me,” insists Ludwig, who added that he was fortunate to come in last season and have a quarterback so dialed in for a great senior year. Ludwig noted that Huntley is a student of the game.

“He took to the new system, the new things we were asking him,” Ludwig said. “He had some very limited background in some of the pro style stuff we were doing but did a great job executing it.”

Huntley quarterbacked the Utes to an 11-3 record and a second straight Pac-12 South title, throwing 19 touchdowns and being intercepted just four times by season’s end. They were on the verge of a College Football Playoff berth late in the season.

Ludwig has spoken with a couple of NFL coaches about Huntley and speaks highly of him.

“You never know what those guys, in the NFL, are looking for. But I think that’s just going to continue to make Tyler a great story,” Ludwig said. “Because I think he’s got every tool necessary to be very successful at the highest level and I know that will fuel him. He’ll take that as motivation and just continue to work very hard. The team that gets him is going to be getting a very good quarterback. We know that.”

Huntley and Ludwig have kept in touch since the season ended. They’ve spoken on the phone a couple of times, but mostly through texts and direct messages. Ludwig said Huntley isn’t discouraged by the combine slight and his spirits are high as the NFL draft approaches.

“He’s as hard-a-working quarterback as I’ve been around,” Ludwig said. “Football is extremely important to him and obviously we wish him nothing but the absolute best.”

Ludwig declined to venture a guess as to where Huntley may land in the NFL.

“I have no idea what to expect,” he said.

Huntley’s name is surfacing on several mock drafts. USA Today projects he’ll be taken on the third day.

“One of the more notable NFL combine snubs, Huntley is one of the more exciting quarterbacks of the class to watch,” wrote analyst Patrick Conn. “He won’t get the fanfare of a Tua Tagovailoa or Joe Burrow but he does possess some traits that will translate. Bit of a project early on in his career. Huntley can challenge a defense with his legs at the next level.”

Although Utah’s annual pro day was canceled because of the coronavirus pandemic, Huntley posted some impressive numbers at an unofficial gathering on March 30. Agent Yossi Behar tweeted out video of Huntley and posted his private pro day results.

The former Florida prep star, who is 6-foot-1 and 207 pounds, ran the 40 in 4.56 seconds. SI.com reported that Huntley’s times in the shuttle (4.31) and 3-cone drill (6.84) also topped all of the quarterbacks at the combine. To boot, Huntley had strong showings in the vertical jump (43.5 inches) and broad jump (10 feet, 8.5 inches).

“Huntley already has all of the traits that make a quarterback successful in the NFL,” wrote SI.com’s Ryan Kostecka. “The question remains if he’ll be drafted and given a chance to improve himself.”

*****

What they’re saying about Tyler Huntley ...

CBSSPORTS.COM: “Notable combine snub.”

DRAFTSITE: 5th round, 176th overall — San Francisco 49ers

USA TODAY: 7th round, 231st overall — Dallas Cowboys