The Connecticut Sun drafted University of Maryland star Kaila Charles No. 23 overall, and one selection later, the Washington Mystics picked Creighton forward Jaylyn Agnew at No. 24 in the second round of the WNBA Draft on Friday.

Charles was a third-team AP All-American and first-team All-Big Ten honoree her senior year with the Terrapins, guiding them to 17 straight wins and a Big Ten postseason title before the NCAA Tournament was called off due to the coronavirus pandemic.

The guard averaged 14.3 points and 7.3 rebounds per game in 2019-20.

Agnew, meanwhile, marked Washington’s first selection Friday after the Mystics traded their first-round pick (No. 12 overall) on Wednesday in a hefty three-team deal that brought them former league MVP Tina Charles.

Agnew was named 2020 Big East Player of the Year after scoring 20.8 points per game, including 23.1 points per game and 50 3-pointers in Big East games. She hails from Andover, Kansas, and is the first Creighton player to be selected in the WNBA draft.

“As we got into the draft tonight, we just kinda kept praying as a staff that she would still be there when it came our turn to draft,” Mystics coach and general manager Mike Thibault said. “She fits the mold of our team. We love 3-point shooters. We love people that can space the floor. But that’s not her only skill.”

Agnew will have to compete for a spot on Washington’s talent-laden roster.

“I’m super grateful and excited for the opportunity,” Agnew said. “I think the first thing I texted one of my assistant coaches was, ‘I’m going to be in training camp with Elena Delle Donne and Tina Charles. That’s so awesome!’”

Washington added Texas point guard Alecia “Sug” Sutton with the 36th and final pick of the draft. Sutton averaged 9.9 points and 4.1 assists per game for the Longhorns, the fourth-best assist mark in the Big 12, and was named second-team All-Big 12.

“Good point guards are hard to find,” Thibault said. “She’s got some things to work on, but I think she’s got the right demeanor to play in our league. She’s got some things to learn, but she knows how to push the tempo, she is very unselfish and finds teammates.”

Sign up for Daily Newsletters Manage Newsletters

Copyright © 2020 The Washington Times, LLC. Click here for reprint permission.