The House Judiciary Committee announced Monday that it had postponed an upcoming oversight hearing with Attorney General William Barr William Pelham BarrDemocrats request probe of Barr's remarks on firing of intelligence community IG Judge denies Roger Stone's motion for new trial Democrats call on Trump to halt border wall construction amid pandemic MORE due to the coronavirus outbreak.

In a tweet, Committee Chairman Jerry Nadler Jerrold (Jerry) Lewis NadlerNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus House Judiciary Committee postpones hearing with Barr amid coronavirus outbreak House Democrats plead with key committee chairman to allow remote voting amid coronavirus pandemic MORE (D-N.Y.) explained that "overwhelming" health concerns necessitated the hearing to be pushed to a later date.

Due to overwhelming health and safety concerns, the @HouseJudiciary will postpone our March 31st oversight hearing with Attorney General Barr. DOJ has made a commitment to rescheduling the hearing for when the crisis abates and the Committee is able to reconvene. — (((Rep. Nadler))) (@RepJerryNadler) March 23, 2020

ADVERTISEMENT

The committee was set to grill Barr on allegations that the White House, particularly President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE, urged the Department of Justice (DOJ) to interfere with the sentencing recommendations for Roger Stone Roger Jason StoneRoger Stone heads to Tucker Carlson's program after gag order lifted Judge denies Roger Stone's motion for new trial Juan Williams: Mueller, one year on MORE, a top political ally of the president who informally advised the 2016 Trump campaign.

Democrats on the panel, as well as across the House and Senate, have accused the president and Barr of politicizing the DOJ after it requested "far less" time for Stone's sentence than was recommended only a day earlier by career prosecutors on the case.

“This situation has all the indicia of improper political interference in a criminal prosecution,” Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Stacey Abrams throws support behind vote-by-mail efforts Former MSNBC host explains why UBI is a ventilator for U.S. economy in a crisis MORE (D-N.Y.) said in February.

The House and Senate have begun operating under altered protocols amid the coronavirus epidemic, which has sickened more than 377,000 people worldwide and tens of thousands in the U.S.