The premature end of the school year may have a measurable impact on the educational path for many students in Utah schools, but it also offers a real-life lesson in resiliency and self-reliance that, in normal times, would not be part of the curriculum.

The decision to cut off the remainder of the in-class learning schedule for the state’s public and private schools was not a big surprise given the course of the campaign against the COVID-19 virus. Yet, it is an unprecedented disruption in the regimented world of K-12 education, denying kids the expected formality of completing a step on the ladder in their path toward graduation.

It is particularly unfortunate for high school seniors who will not experience that moment of proud circumstance when they walk among their peers in caps and gowns to accept a diploma. It’s just one of many sad deprivations brought by a pandemic that has upended normalcy in every imaginable way.

Those kids will have a story to tell. The question is what kind of story will they make it?

There will certainly be some positives to recall, as in how students, parents and educators worked to quickly jury-rig a semblance of a routine using online venues for lectures and lessons. Schools were closed, but the business of learning continued.

There were some hard lessons on coping skills, as the rhythms of daily life abruptly halted and, for many Utahns, the family home suddenly also became the classroom and the workplace.

The struggle to overcome unforeseen challenges would certainly comprise an appropriate theme for a commencement address that won’t be delivered this year.

For the education system as a whole, there are concerns about how the disruption will impact the various measures of educational progress. Final grades and standardized assessment tests will be skewed, but it would have been worse if the disruption occurred at the beginning of the school year.

Still, there will have to be a formal accounting of the degree of variance from the standard measures of progress and accomplishment. Whatever that variance turns out to be, it will most likely be marked by a simple asterisk, and the next school year will begin as normal.

For most students, the disruption will be inconsequential. Graduating seniors have already figured out their next steps, toward college or other endeavors. Younger kids have plenty of time to catch up. There must be particular anxiety among college students preparing to enter a workplace that at the moment looks much less hospitable than it did just a couple of months ago. They, like everyone, will have to reckon with the unknowns of a post-pandemic economy.

A central purpose of the education system is to teach kids the skills needed to navigate in the adult world. Students learn that change is always afoot, and the future is forever uncertain — a lesson we’ve seen most harshly thrust upon this year’s seniors. Yet, for all of the disruption and heartache, we’re confident the class of 2020 will rise up to the task ahead.