CLOSE

Those who enjoy camping over Easter might need to change their plans this year due to the new coronavirus pandemic.

In Arizona, campgrounds at national parks and forests are closed and most services are suspended. Some national parks, including Grand Canyon, are closed. Day-use areas in heavily visited areas such as Sedona and Prescott are closed as well.

But most hiking trails are open, dispersed camping is allowed and you can still engage in recreation that allows for social distancing. Be sure to consider the effect your travels could have on others.

“Easter weekend is often one of our busiest times at recreation sites on the forest,” Tonto National Forest Supervisor Neil Bosworth said in a statement. “This year we are asking you to recreate responsibly, avoid crowded spaces and stay home if you feel sick."

MORE THINGS TO DO: For restaurant reviews, travel tips, concert picks and more, subscribe to azcentral.com.

The National Park Service website advises checking with your desired park before setting out.

Many state-park campgrounds are open "for responsible outdoor recreation," according to the Arizona State Parks and Trails website. However, group gatherings are not allowed, and ramadas and group camping areas will be closed.

"Arizona State Parks and Trails recreation parks, campgrounds and trails are open. Historic parks, visitor centers and gift shops are closed" the website says.

Park officials will monitor the number of visitors to ensure social distancing. Among the closed state-park campgrounds are Fool Hollow Lake Recreation Area and Alamo Lake State Park.

In a March 30 executive order, Gov. Doug Ducey asked Arizonans to limit time outside their homes with the exception of "engaging in outdoor exercise activities, such as walking, hiking, running, biking or golfing, but only if appropriate physical distancing practices are used."

For the latest guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, visit cdc.gov/coronavirus. The CDC recommends:

Wearing cloth face coverings in places where it would be difficult to maintain 6 feet of separation.

Staying home as much as possible.

Disinfecting belongings.

Washing your hands regularly.

Reach the reporter at kimi.robinson@gannett.com or at 602-444-4968. Follow her on Twitter @kimirobin.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/travel/arizona/road-trips/2020/04/10/easter-camping-arizona-campgrounds-closed-and-open/5124114002/