Katie Price's boyfriend Kris Boyson has denied threatening a police officer after she was arrested on suspicion of drink-driving.

Boyson, 30, is in an on-off relationship with the model and reality star, 40, and last night the pair arrived home from a holiday in Thailand together.

He appeared at Medway Magistrates Court this morning where he pleaded not guilty to using threatening or abusive language and behaviour against a police officer.

The alleged victim of the incident near Boyson's home in Gravesend, Kent, is an officer called PC Blundell, according to court records.

It happened after Boyson got into an argument with a photographer, the court heard.

Kris Boyson, 30, (pictured today) appeared at Medway Magistrates Court this morning where he is charged with using threatening or abusive language and behaviour against a police officer

Boyson, 30, is in an on-off relationship with model and reality star Katie Price, 40, and the pair (pictured together) last night arrived home from a holiday in Thailand together

The alleged incident happened two days after the couple were found inside Price's pink Range Rover that had crashed in a bush following a boozy night out in south London.

Price, who was arrested, but later cleared of drink-driving, was found slumped in the back, while Boyson was discovered sitting in the front on October 9 last year.

They had been celebrating his birthday at a restaurant called The Meze in Bexleyheath.

Boyson visited a police station the following day on October 10. The next day he is alleged to have threatened the officer.

Boyson is pictured smiling with an unknown man outside Medway Magistrates Court today

Boyson and Price were found in her pink Range Rover after a boozy night out in south London

The charge claims that the 30-year-old used 'threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour with intent to cause [the police officer] to believe that immediate unlawful violence would be used against him', or 'to provoke the immediate use of unlawful violence by him whereby that person was likely to believe that such violence would be used, or it was likely that such violence would be provoked'.

The couple touched down in the UK last night after a relaxing break in Koh Samui.

Price uploaded several pictures of them smiling together on social media.

The mother-of-five was cleared of drink-driving but convicted of the lesser charge of being drunk in charge of a vehicle.

The case against Boyson, who was released on bail, continues.

Price uploaded this picture of her and her lover on holiday in Koh Samui, Thailand last week