On November 22, 1978, Teddy Kennedy was alone with his thoughts in Arlington National Cemetery, at the gravesite of his older brother, who had been struck down this very day 15 years earlier. On an overcast, drizzly morning, he stood on a hill overlooking the Potomac River into Washington, D.C. He had to turn his back on the city to look down at the Cape Cod granite stones surrounding the gray slate tablet and the eternal flame that marked John F. Kennedy’s resting place. The capital city behind him represented the present and the future. On the ground before him was the past. It was a personal history that carried obligations, driving him forward into a future he was not always sure he wanted, but that he felt compelled to pursue.

“Ted Kennedy had inherited a legend along with his name and he was almost as much trapped by the legend as propelled by it,” wrote the famous political journalist Teddy White. Edward M. Kennedy had power, fame, and money, and looked the part in his formfitting suit, big-knotted wide tie, and full head of wavy, flamboyant hair. Dark cuff links dotted his wrists. But his face was drawn in on itself. His mouth was closed and slack. His brow was furrowed, pushing down on his eyes, which were half shut and held dark shadows in their recesses. All the lines on his 46-year-old face—the dimples, the cheekbones—pointed dramatically toward the center of his anxiety and melancholy: his inaccessible, heavy-lidded eyes.

It wasn’t just a moment to reflect on his slain brother. It was a trying time for everyone. Since J.F.K.’s death, “Americans had been abused by history,” White wrote. Vietnam, race riots, Watergate, inflation, rising levels of crime and squalor in America’s cities. J.F.K. was the last president “who had given Americans a sense of control of their own destiny,” and he had presided over the nation at a time when the economy was stable and “working people grew comfortable and the rich got richer.”

After J.F.K.’s tragic death, Bobby Kennedy took up the torch. He fused the Kennedy glamour with the increasingly progressive spirit of the age. J.F.K. had been conservative on economics and hawkish on foreign policy. When he ran in 1960, Lyndon Johnson had been the “New Deal candidate.” But after J.F.K.’s death, Bobby grafted the J.F.K. legend onto the anti-war, pro-civil-rights passions sweeping through the left.

Then in 1968, Bobby was killed by a crazed Palestinian who shot him in the head. And suddenly Teddy was the last Kennedy left. He turned down requests to run for president in 1968. Then his disastrous decisions on a summer night in 1969, which resulted in the death of Mary Jo Kopechne on Chappaquiddick Island, made a run in 1972 or 1976 out of the question. But his family name still called to him, and weighed on him, and Teddy thought enough time might have passed to make people forget Chappaquiddick, or forgive him, or feel maybe slightly less disgusted by it.

Teddy was now 46, the same age that J.F.K. had been in the year of his death. But Jack had been elected president of the United States for three years by that age. Teddy had been a U.S. senator for 16 years, but if he had any plans of following in his brother’s footsteps, the clock was ticking. He stood silently, holding a rose.

Two weeks later, Kennedy’s plane touched down in Memphis on a Saturday. He stepped onto the tarmac and into frigid cold. The temperature would sink well below freezing that night. Democrats were gathered there in early December for an unusual midterm convention, of which there have been only three in the party’s history, in 1974, 1978, and 1982. Democrats held the first one two years after George McGovern failed to stop Richard Nixon from winning a second term in 1972. The midterm convention was symbolic of a party that was trying desperately to avoid disintegration. The miserable weather in the River City matched the mood of the Democratic Party and the nation.