Rep. Lee Zeldin (R-N.Y.) continued to sound off on Thursday’s anti-hate resolution passed in the House of Representatives by pointing out the “double standard” that exists for Democrats and Republicans.

After voting against the sweeping resolution that stemmed from continued controversial comments on Israel from Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-Minn.), Zeldin slammed the legislation in a radio interview on Sunday morning due to the fact that it failed to specifically address Omar’s remarks, which were deemed anti-semitic by many.

“Instead of a resolution naming names and being singularly, emphatically, unequivocally condemning anti-Semitism … you had a resolution that kept getting diluted and watered down, filled with moral equivalency, which is dangerous,” he told AM 970 in New York.

Zeldin was one of just 23 Republicans to vote against the resolution, which Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wy.) called a “sham” and Rep. Dan Crenshaw (R-Texas) called a “deceitful way to give Omar cover.”

The Jewish GOP congressman also called out the “double standard” that exists for Democrats and Republicans. He pointed to the House resolution earlier this year that condemned white supremacy and referenced remarks from Rep. Steve King (R-Iowa), who questioned why terms like “white supremacist” were offensive.

“If [Omar] was a Republican, this resolution would’ve been naming names, she’d be removed from the House Foreign Affairs Committee and we would be talking about anti-Semitism solely, singularly and forcefully,” he insisted.

As IJR Red reported, Zeldin previously explained his vote against the resolution on the House floor last week, saying he was “giving Rep. Omar more credit” than House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) and adding that he believes “she knows exactly what she’s doing.”

Watch below:

Rep. Lee Zeldin (R-NY), who is a Jewish member of Congress, explains why he did not vote for the Democrats' resolution condemning hate This is a must watchpic.twitter.com/Kocwj1WPZm — Ryan Saavedra (@RealSaavedra) March 8, 2019

“It is an American value, by the way, to have reasonable, legitimate criticism of a government. Whether it be the U.S. government, Israel, or any other government,” he said at the time. “It is not an American value, though, to be hurling anti-Semitic rhetoric. Anti-Semitism must be condemned unequivocally and emphatically.

“It’s time to call out these statements for what they are: pointed, bigoted, unreasonable, illegitimate, anti-Semitic,” Zeldin continued, adding that “anti-semitism has been bipartisan in the past, it should be bipartisan today, and should be bipartisan for every moment in the future.” While Zeldin voted “no,” the resolution ultimately passed in the House.

Published in