No football or baseball games. No concerts. No Pride in June, or Burning Man in the fall.

Life in California will not look the same when the state emerges from its collective shelter in place, Gov. Gavin Newsom said Tuesday, in a sobering address about his plans for reopening society while the coronavirus is still a global threat.

“We talk about what the new normal will look like,” he said. “Normal, it will not be — at least until we have herd immunity and we have a vaccine.”

Newsom stopped short of saying professional sporting events are done for the year or that live theater will be shut down for months. But large gatherings of all kinds may continue to be forbidden, or at least heavily discouraged, for the foreseeable future.

And new social-distancing protocols likely will be reflected in every other part of Californians’ lives, in ways large and small. Children may be assigned staggered school times to avoid overcrowding classrooms. Restaurants may have to remove half their tables. Office space may need to be redesigned to keep every desk 6 feet apart. Everyone may be wearing face coverings well into 2021.

“You may be having dinner with a waiter wearing gloves and a face mask, where the menu is disposable, where half the tables disappear, where your temperature is checked. These are likely scenarios,” Newsom said.

“Large-scale events that bring in hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands of strangers all together across every conceivable difference, health and otherwise, are not in the cards based upon our current guidelines and current expectations,” he said.

Within minutes after Newsom’s address began at noon, San Francisco Pride was called off and the summer San Francisco Opera season was canceled. Many large events planned for the summer already had been axed, but more cancellations and postponements were expected through the fall and into next year.

While 40 million Californians will continue to shelter in place for the next two weeks, and probably longer, Newsom, with state and county health officials, will lay out plans for how to lift restrictions and ease residents out of their homes and back into public spaces.

Those plans will largely focus on developing resources in hospitals and in public health to allow for widespread testing and the ability to quickly contain new cases to prevent further outbreaks.

But society itself is being reimagined too, at least for the next few months — but possibly a year or more — until scientists develop a vaccine or enough people are infected that the state could reach herd immunity and the virus isn’t able to spread. Until that time, people will need to maintain some amount of separation, even after they’re let out of their homes.

“Things can change radically, and of course we could have therapeutics. We could get vaccines earlier than anticipated,” Newsom said. But he said even in a best-case scenario, if a vaccine or drugs to fight the coronavirus are developed faster than anyone expects, it’s “unlikely” that life will look normal until the fall at the earliest.

The coronavirus is still so new, and much about how it spreads among humans is not known. Infectious-disease experts can’t say what the pandemic will look like in a month or six months or a year. It may be seasonal and largely disappear for the summer, only to resurface just as aggressively in the fall. It may not go away at all.

Now Playing:

As long as the potential exists for further outbreaks and widespread illness and death, people will need to behave as though the virus is lurking in the community, public health officials said.

“If we remove all of our interventions, we will again expect this surge,” said Dr. Sonia Angell, director of the California Department of Public Health, at the governor’s news briefing. “This time period we’re entering is not about going back to where we were before. It won’t look the same.”

For a hint of what to expect, state and local public health officials said they’re looking to other countries that already are moving past large outbreaks and attempting to reopen social and financial institutions. Several countries experienced flareups in new cases when they began lifting restrictions.

That reinforces the notion that people will need to remain vigilant when they go back out in public, infectious-disease experts have said.

“The governor is warning us to expect that life will look different,” said Shannon Bennett, chief of science for the California Academy of Sciences. “He is driving us to anticipate that the way we live in society needs to be reimagined to how we can live in a post-COVID-19 world.”

At the Academy of Sciences, that may mean visitors are checked for symptoms, or that museum spaces are redesigned so people aren’t waiting in crowded queues, she said.

In crowded spaces such as grocery stores and on buses, face coverings may be common, experts have said. Handshakes and friendly hugs may not come back. BART may need to add more trains to prevent overcrowding.

Small social gatherings will be OK, and even encouraged, as people reacquaint themselves with friends and relatives they may not have seen for months. Restaurants, bars and clubs will reopen, state and local public health officials said. But size limits may remain in effect for some time, and that could result in long-term closures of many venues.

“I heard what I didn’t want to hear, but I certainly wasn’t surprised,” said Kelly Tweeddale, executive director of the San Francisco Ballet, which has already lost half of its 2020 season after the War Memorial Opera House was closed.

“It would be selfish to only think about how quickly we can get back to business, but we have to consider the safety of our audiences as well,” Tweeddale said. “I do think the performing arts will be part of the solution after we come out the other side of this. But if you do it too soon, you risk losing the trust of your audiences.”

In his briefing, Newsom imagined that schools may separate children during assemblies, lunch breaks and recess to reduce crowds. Public spaces such as playgrounds and parks will need to undergo regular “deep sanitation” to keep them germ-free.

“We need to get our kids back to school. We need to deal with their mental health and their parents’ mental health,” Newsom said. “And we need to do it in a safe way, so those kids are not going to school and getting infected and coming home and infecting grandpa and grandma.”

Chronicle staff writer Joshua Kosman contributed to this report.

Erin Allday is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: eallday@sfchronicle.com