More than 4,200 people living on the streets or in homeless shelters in California are now sleeping in hotels, with rooms for an additional 10,800 now available, Gov. Newsom said Saturday.

Many of those housed in the hotels and motels have tested positive for the coronavirus, with high-risk individuals — the elderly or those with chronic disease — also given priority, the governor said.

The rooms for the homeless are part of the state’s Project Roomkey initiative, which Newsom announced two weeks ago to protect some of the most vulnerable residents during the pandemic.

The Federal Emergency Management Agency is paying 75% of the cost of the rooms, with the state distributing $150 million among counties to help pay for the rest.

Santa Clara, Yolo and Merced counties are among those that have embraced the program, Newsom said. But some other counties or cities are blocking the effort, he said. He declined to identify them, but urged those communities to reconsider.

In one case, an Orange County senior community, located in Laguna Woods, successfully protested the use of a nearby hotel to house the homeless.

“Consider the morality of those decisions. Consider your station in life and history,” Newsom said during a news conference outside one of the Santa Clara County motels in the program. “No one stands taller than those leaders who bend down on one knee to help lift others up.”

The use of motels should be considered a long-term prospect to house the homeless, officials said, with federal and state funding to help counties purchase motels.

“We all know that we both have to address this emergency, but as we grow out of it, recognize that there’s a role for every person in our community, there’s a home for every person in our community,” said Cindy Chavez, president of the Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors. “We think this is the right thing to do.”

Motel 6 is among the hospitality businesses participating in Project Roomkey. Corporate leadership is setting aside 47 of its motels in 19 counties to house homeless residents, with a total of 5,025 rooms, Newsom said.

Even as Newsom touted progress in that effort, he said that the state faces major battles, with 87 new coronavirus deaths Friday, with 1,072 dead in the state so far.

Later on Saturday, Los Angeles County health officials announced that there were 81 new coronavirus deaths in that county alone.

Newsom also addressed concerns raised about his refusal to release details of a $1 billion contract for masks.

He said those details will be made available, but not now, not until he has the hundreds of millions of safety equipment in hand sometime early May.

“This is the Wild, Wild West, of deals gone awry, people competing against one another,” he said.

Yet among the most concerning issues is the increasing number of positive cases at nursing homes and assisted living facilities, Newsom said.

The California Department of Public Health released the number of coronavirus cases at the state’s skilled nursing facilities for the first time Saturday — and several Bay Area locations were prominent on the list.

Gateway Care & Rehabilitation in Hayward topped the region, with 102 cases, including 69 patients and 33 staff members. Thirteen residents at Gateway have died, sparking an investigation by the Alameda County district attorney’s office.

Among the other hardest-hit Bay Area facilities, according to the state report: Canyon Springs Post-Acute Care in San Jose, with 64 cases; Valley House Rehabilitation Center in Santa Clara, with 63 cases; and Central Gardens Convalescent, an assisted-living facility in San Francisco, with 62 cases.

Of the 1,224 skilled nursing facilities in California, 261 reported one or more coronavirus cases as of Friday.

Breakouts at three skilled nursing facilities in Tulare County, for example, “would break your heart when you learn more about them,” Newsom said. “If we stop taking it seriously, we will have serious consequences.”

Jill Tucker is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: jtucker@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @jilltucker