President Trump halted the $893 million the U.S. was scheduled to pay to fund the World Health Organization (WHO), an arm of the U.N., Fox News reported.

WHO is certainly culpable in the worldwide disaster COVID-19 has unleashed. They validated China’s reports, even as China was scrambling to cover up the true source of the virus (we may never know), and to downplay its danger by severely under-reporting cases and deaths.

In fact, WHO has almost literally been in China’s pocket for at least the last two years, locking out even the mention of Taiwan, and giving credit for that nationalist Chinese island nation’s success in fighting the virus to Beijing, its sworn enemy.

WHO is a typical arm of the fantasy diplomacy bizarro world of the U.N. It’s a bloated bureaucracy rife with petty fiefdoms, likely some corruption, and lots of back scratching and looking the other way from horrible human rights violations. However, it does do good work when it gets engaged properly.

The health research community is fairly small, insular, and largely academic, in the sense that it’s made up of scientists who mix at conferences, read each other’s papers and publications, and keep up with what organization is funding what program.

For example, Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, part of the NIH, personally knows WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Gebreyesus. They’ve worked together for years on thorny issues like Ebola, which is still a problem in places like the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Politics, however, dictates what WHO says and does publicly. As part of the dysfunctional U.N., is the WHO salvageable at all? Can it be reformed?

Gordon Chang at Fox News thinks using the big stick of holding back cash is useful.

The WHO, President Trump correctly said Tuesday, failed its “basic duty and must be held accountable.”

But holding back money simply gives China more opportunity to step in and fund what we don’t. That would make WHO even more a puppet to the Chinese Communist Party, and it would not strip one bit of the worldwide respect WHO gets for the good work it does.

I think Trump’s move, for now, is proper. We need to send a message that WHO has to be accountable–as well as China–to lawful and civil nations around the world. But we should not make this withdrawal permanent.

I’m reminded of history in a different technical field. In 1939, every nation working on nuclear physics experiments and papers published their work freely. That is until Germany stopped publishing theirs, and with the Anschluss completed and the breakup of Czechoslovakia, one of the best sources of good uranium ore, stopped making that ore available to the world.

This alarmed physicist Leo Szilard so much that he sought out Albert Einstein to sign a letter that economist Alex Sachs delivered–and personally read–to President Franklin D. Roosevelt. The result of that personal visit, and the letter from Einstein ultimately led to the Manhattan Project.

I’m not drawing any direct parallels between viruses and atomic bombs here. But what’s clear is that two years ago, the U.S. sent technical ambassadors to Wuhan, to visit the new Bio Safety Level-4 (BSL-4, the highest level) lab there. That visit to the Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV) so alarmed Jamison Fouss and Rick Switzer, the consul general and counselor of environment, science, technology and health respectively, that they sent two cables to Washington noting that WIV lacked trained personnel to handle novel coronavirus research.

BSL-4 labs deal with pathogens that are both potentially deadly and have no treatment or vaccine, such as SARS-causing bat coronaviruses. Now China has stopped publishing papers or sharing their knowledge on the topic. This is what reminded me of Szilard and Eugene Wigner’s trip to see Einstein.

The alarm has been raised again and again, and WHO has sided with China. Clearly, this is unacceptable. Either the U.S. has to gain control of WHO, and force China to open up and share valuable research, and not lie about outbreaks with global health consequences, or the WHO must become irredeemable in our eyes.

The latter choice will, I fear, be the beginning of a very cold war with the Chinese government, putting the rest of the world at risk for the next pandemic, which is almost certain to come in the future.

We need the WHO, if it can be saved. I hope we can find a way to save it.