Musicians including rappers Snoop Dogg and The Game are calling for Fox News to dismiss host Laura Ingraham over comments she made about deceased rapper Nipsey Hussle.

The rappers took issue with a news segment in which Ingraham appeared to mock Hussle's criticism of President Trump Donald John TrumpWuhan lab denies claims of coronavirus origination Banks say they ran out of PPP funding 'within minutes' Trump defends testing capabilities, blasts critics during WH briefing MORE, saying that they would not allow the host to disrespect the late artist.

Los Angeles-based rapper The Game said in an Instagram post that Fox News should fire her or risk losing "millions of viewers."

ADVERTISEMENT

“We are NO LONGER laying quiet while you continuously disrespect our brother, culture African Americans as a whole,” The Game wrote. “I will use my platform & call on my peers to do the same. Nips passing nor his legacy is to be taken lightly as there will be consequences for any disrespect now or in the future as long as I have a voice!!!”

Snoop Dogg, who spoke at a memorial service for the late rapper, commented on the post, "I'm in."

Rapper T.I. also criticized Ingraham's comments, calling the segment "disgusting."

“Neither of you WILL EVER know or experience the level of love, appreciation and respect that Nip has," T.I. said in a separate Instagram post, referring to Ingraham and Fox News contributor Raymond Arroyo. "EVEN IN DEATH!!! So let that sizzle in ya lil hateful, demonic spirits.”

R&B artist Tank shared a link on his Instagram to a petition calling for Ingraham's dismissal. The petition had received more than 36,000 signatures as of Tuesday morning.

Ingraham last week appeared to mock one of rapper YG's hits songs, "FDT," that he released in tandem with Hussle in 2016. The song includes the chorus, "F--- Donald Trump."

“Now, this dear artist recently released a song called FDT, 'F Donald Trump,'" Ingraham said on her nightly news program, before transitioning to a clip from a music video for the song.

"OK, that’s a very creative refrain," Ingraham added. "The chorus that goes on and on, is that related to lowest unemployment ever, basically, for African-Americans?”

Here's Laura Ingraham mocking a murder victim, just hours after he was laid to rest, because he opposed Trump 3 years ago. (Also, the man rapping in that video is YG, a person who is not Nipsey Hussle.) For shame.pic.twitter.com/02iBYdr5wo — Angela Morabito (@AngelaLMorabito) April 13, 2019

The remarks came just weeks after Hussle was shot and killed outside a clothing store he owned in Los Angeles.

Fox News did not immediately return a request for comment from The Hill.

Hussle voiced his displeasure with Trump in an interview with Billboard in April 2016, saying that the then-presidential candidate's stance on Hispanic people bothered him.

"That made me [feel] like dude is definitely out of his mind and our country sounding crazy for even taking him as a legitimate candidate," he said of his remarks about Hispanics. "It says something about the American people if he do actually get elected."