Don Imus, 79 Controversial radio personality Don Imus hosted his syndicated show, "Imus in the Morning" for almost 50 years, building a large audience with his shock jock antics. However, in 2007 his racially charged comments about the Rutgers University women's basketball team drew criticism and eventually he was fired by CBS. He was went to work for WABC in New York where he stayed until 2018. Imus was also known for working with sick and dying children at his Imus Ranch program.<br><br>Here, Imus hosts his last show on the Fox Business Network in 2015. Richard Drew/AP, FILE

Jerry Herman, 88 Composer and lyricist Jerry Herman wrote such enduring Broadway musical hits as "Mame," "Hello, Dolly!" and "La Cage aux Folles." He won two Grammys and two Tonys as well as a special Lifetime Achievement Tony in 2009. The next year, he was awarded a Kennedy Center Honor. Herman was known for his hummable, uplifting songs and his optimistic 'jois de vivre.' He died on Dec. 26 when he was 88 years old. Jack Robinson/Hulton Archive via Getty Images

Allee Willis, 72 Grammy-winning songwriter Allee Willis wrote such classics as “September” and “Boogie Wonderland” by Earth, Wind & Fire as well as the theme song for the TV show “Friends.” She was nominated for a Tony for co-writing the Broadway musical “The Color Purple.” Fifty million records of her songs have been sold. She was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2018. Allee Willis died on Dec. 24, 2019, at the age of 72. The Washington Post/Bret Hartman/The Washington Post via Getty Images, FILE

Edward Aschoff, 34 Edward Aschoff was a college football reporter for ESPN. He started working for ESPN in 2011 and would travel to college campuses around the country covering the games. He also worked as a radio sideline reporter and he wrote a column for the SEC blog. In 2016, Aschoff and a fellow reporter won first place in the Football Writer’s Association writing contest for their look at the role of race in college football. He died on Dec. 24, 2019, at the age of 34. Rich Arden/ESPN Images via AP

Ram Dass, 88 A spiritual leader of the counterculture movement of the 1960's, Ram Dass (born Richard Alpert) was an early proponent of the LSD movement. He was a Harvard psychology professor and worked with Timothy Leary. He wrote the book Be Here Now in 1971 and went on to write many more. He co-founded the Seva Foundation, which works to prevent blindness and treat other visual impairments around the world. Ram Das died Dec. 22. He was 88. Robert Altman/Michael Ochs Archives via Getty Images, FILE

Anna Karina, 79 Danish-French film actress Anna Karina is best known for her roles in French New Wave films through collaborations with director Jean-Luc Goddard. Karina won the 1961 best actress award at the Berlin International Film Festival for “Une Femme Est Une Femme.” Karina died on Dec. 14 in Paris. She was 79. <br><br> Karina on the set of "Anna." Norbert Perrau\INA via Getty Images

Danny Aiello, 86 Actor Danny Aiello, the blue-collar character actor whose long career playing tough guys included roles in "Fort Apache, the Bronx," "The Godfather, Part II," "Once Upon a Time in America" and his Oscar-nominated performance as a pizza man in Spike Lee's "Do the Right Thing," died on Dec. 12. He was 86.<br><br> Here, Danny Aiello poses for a photo at Gigino restaurant in New York, July 28, 2001. Jim Cooper/AP, FILE

Pete Frates, 34 A former baseball star at Boston College, Pete Frates was diagnosed with ALS in 2012, when he was 27. He helped popularize the Ice Bucket Challenge and helped it become a social media phenomenon, raising over $100 million for ALS research. Pete Frates died on Dec. 9 at the age of 34. Dina Rudick/The Boston Globe via Getty Images

Caroll Spinney, 85 Puppeteer Caroll Spinney played Big Bird and Oscar the Grouch on "Sesame Street" from the show’s start in 1969 until 2018. Through these portrayals Spinney's Big Bird would go on to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, be featured on a U.S. postage stamp and named a “living legend” by the Library of Congress. Spinney died at his home on Dec. 8, 2019, after suffering from Dystonia for many years. He was 85. <br><br> Caroll Spinney is pictured with Oscar the Grouch, May 14, 2003. Lawrence K. Ho/Los Angeles Times via Getty Images

Rene Auberjonois, 79 Rene Auberjonois was an actor who worked in television, movies, and on Broadway. He played the role of Odo on “Star Trek Deep Space Nine” during a seven-season run in the 1990s. He was twice nominated for an Emmy - for “Benson” in 1984 and for “The Practice” in 2001. He also acted in films such as “MASH.” Rene won a Tony in 1970 for his role in the Broadway musical CoCo and was nominated for a Tony three more times over the next three decades. Rene Auberjonois died on Dec. 8 at the age of 79. Albert L. Ortega/Getty Images

Paul Volcker, 92 Economist Paul Volcker was Federal Reserve Board Chairman under Presidents Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan from 1978 to 1987 and he is credited with helping to slow runaway inflation by raising interest rates to record levels. He later served as an economic adviser to President Barack Obama and formulated the Volcker Rule to restrict risk-taking on Wall Street, which went into effect in 2014. He died on Dec. 8 at the age of 92. Wally Mcnamee/Corbis via Getty Images

Juice WRLD, 21 Rapper Juice WRLD, whose birth name is Jarad A. Higgins, died on Dec. 8 after suffering a seizure. He was 21. The up-and-coming young artist from Chicago became known for the hit song, "Lucid Dreams" and a top album, "Death Race for Love." His music touched on mental health and mortality and he was open about his struggles with substance abuse. Juice WRLD was named Top New Artist at the Billboard Music Awards in 2019 and had recently signed a deal with Interscope records. </br></br>Juice WRLD performs at Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival, April 21, 2019. Christopher Polk/Rex/Shutterstock

Shelley Morrison 83 Shelley Morrison had an acting career that spanned six decades. She was best known for her role as Rosario Salazar, from 1999 to 2006. on the television show “Will & Grace.” In 2000, Shelley, along with the rest of the cast, won a Screen Actors Guild award for best ensemble in a comedy series. Morrison also co-starred in the television show “The Flying Nun” in the late 60’s and early 70’s. In 1997 she appeared in the movie “Fools Rush In.” She died on Dec. 1 at the age of 83. Frederick Brown/Reuters

Walter Mercado, 87 Puerto Rican Astrologer Walter Mercado dispensed his own brand of wisdom from the stars for more than 50 years. His predictions, delivered with a flair for showmanship and elaborate costumes and always ending with a message of love, reached an estimated 120 million viewers, making him a fixture in Latino households and one of the most famous personalities in all of Spanish language television. He was believed to be 87 years old when he died on Nov. 2, 2019.<br><br>Astrologer Walter Mercado lounges in his Miami apartment with pictures of his relatives on the lilac walls in 1997. Miami Herald-Sun Sentinel via Newscom, FILE

John Witherspoon, 77 Actor-comedian John Witherspoon died in Los Angeles on Oct. 29, 2019. He memorably played Ice Cube’s father in the "Friday" films. He was 77. The actor co-stared in three "Friday" films, appearing on "The Wayans Bros." television series and voicing the grandfather in "The Boondocks" animated series. His film roles included “Vampire in Brooklyn” and “Boomerang” and he was a frequent guest on "Late Show with David Letterman." <br><br> John Witherspoon visits the "Late Show With David Letterman" at the Ed Sullivan Theater on Dec. 21, 2009, in New York. Ray Tamarra/Getty Images

Kay Hagan, 66 Former Sen. Kay Hagan died on Oct. 28 in her home in Greensboro, North Carolina. She was 66. Hagen was an attorney and former vice president of what is now Bank of America. She became the first woman to defeat an incumbent woman in a Senate election in 2008. <br><br> Sen. Kay Hagan (D-N.C.) in Asheville, N.C., Oct. 28, 2014. Mike Belleme/The New York Times/Redux

John Conyers, 90 Former Rep. John Conyers Jr., D-Mich. was the longest serving African American member of Congress in U.S. history, serving from 1965 to 2017. Conyers became active in the civil rights movement after returning from service in the Korean War. Conyers won election to the House in 1964 and would help found the Congressional Black Caucus in 1969. Conyers died at home on Oct. 27. He was 90.<br><br> House Judiciary Committee Chairman John Conyers (D-MI) talks with reporters after a press briefing with the Congressional Black Caucus at the Capitol, Sept. 9, 2009. Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Leroy Johnson, 91 Leroy Johnson, the first black Georgia state senator to be elected after Reconstruction post-Civil War, died on Oct 24 at the age of 91. Johnson was elected to the Georgia Senate in 1962, and served from 1963 to 1975. During his term, he was also chairman of the Georgia Senate Judiciary Committee. He was credited for desegregating the Georgia state capitol building and instituting integrated bathrooms and drinking fountains. <br> <br> State Sen. Leroy Johnson sits at his desk in the Georgia Legislature on May 28, 1964, in Atlanta. AP

Elijah Cummings, 68 Congressman Elijah Cummings, the chairman of the House Oversight and Reform Committee and a longtime advocate for civil rights, died of complications from longstanding health problems. Cummings served in Congress since 1996, representing Maryland's 7th Congressional District, and became a powerful figure in the Democratic party. He was leading an impeachment inquiry of President Donald Trump. Elijah Cummings died on Oct. 17. He was 68. <br> <br> Elijah Cummings in the House Oversight Committee hearing room in Washington, D.C., May 2, 2019. Justin T. Gellerson/The New York Times via Redux

Diahann Carroll, 84 Diahann Carroll made history in 1968 as the first African American woman to star in a television series, in a non-stereotypical role, in the sitcom "Julia." She was a trailblazer who opened the door for black women on TV and in 2011 was inducted into the Television Academy Hall of Fame. In addition to her film and television career, Carroll starred in several Broadway productions, including "Agnes of God," "Sunset Boulevard" and "Bubbling Brown Sugar." Diahann Carroll died on Oct. 4 at the age of 84. </br</br>Portrait of American singer and actress Diahann Carroll in New York, circa 1990. Anthony Barboza/Getty Images, FILE

Jessye Norman, 74 Soprano Jessye Norman was an international opera star, five-time Grammy award-winner and recipient of the Kennedy Center Honor and the National Medal of Arts. Her operatic debut was in 1969 in Berlin and at the Metropolitan Opera in 1983. Growing up in a musical family in the segregated South, she fell in love with opera as a child and became a trailblazer in the industry. In 2003, the Jessye Norman School of the Arts was created for under-served students in Augusta, Ga., her hometown. Jessye Norman died on Sept. 30 at the age of 74. Sean Gallup/Getty Images

Jacques Chirac, 86 Former French president Jacques Chirac, who led France from 1995 to 2007, has died at the age of 86. The former president also served as prime minister of France and mayor of Paris over the course of his political career. Jacques Chirac died on Sept. 26 at the age of 86. <br><br> French Prime Minister Jacques Chirac delivers a speech at the Dunkirk City Hall, northern France, April 25, 1975. AFP/Getty Images, FILE

Corinne “Cokie” Roberts, 75 Award-winning journalist Corinne “Cokie” Roberts started her career in local news and NPR and became a household name at ABC News, where she was a Washington correspondent and analyst. From 1996 to 2002 she and Sam Donaldson co-anchored “This Week.” She won countless awards and was inducted into the Broadcasting and Cable Hall of Fame. She was also the author of several books, including three New York Times bestsellers. Cokie Roberts died on Sept. 17 at the age of 75.</br></br>Cokie Roberts covering the 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, N.C. Rick Rowell/ABC

Ric Ocasek, 75 Rock musician Ric Ocasek fronted The Cars, one of the most popular bands from the new wave scene of the late 1970's and 80's with hits like, "My Best Friend's Girl," "Drive," "Shake It Up," and "Tonight She Comes." The group disbanded in 1988, but performed a few more times, including a set for the band's induction to the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame in 2018. Ocasek also also worked as a producer on albums for bands like Weezer, No Doubt and Bad Religion. He was believed to be 75 when he was found dead in his home on Sept. 15.<br><br>Here, Ocasek poses for a photograph, circa 1982. Lynn Goldsmith/Corbis/VCG via Getty Images

Eddie Money, 70 Rock musician Eddie Money, best known for hits "Two Tickets to Paradise" and "Baby Hold On" has passed away after revealing his stage four esophageal cancer diagnosis. Money rose to fame in the 80's with his hit "Take Me Home Tonight" as well as pairing up with Ronni Spector and The Ronettes. He found rejuvenation in his career later in life with his music being featured in a GEICO commercial and appearing in a reality show with his family.</br></br>Eddie Money performs on stage. Richard E. Aaron/Redferns via Getty Images, FILE

Juanita Abernathy, 88 Juanita Abernathy, the widow of the Rev. Dr. Ralph Abernathy, who along with Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., helped to start the civil rights movement. She was a key player in planning the 1955 Montgomery Bus Boycott and marched on Washington in 1963. Abernathy also taught voter education and supported the Freedom Riders as they made their trek. Juanita Abernathy died on Sept. 12 at the age of 88.</br></br>Juanita Abernathy receives the George Thomas Leland Award at the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation's 45th annual legislative conference dinner in Washington, Sept. 19, 2015. Carolyn Kaster/AP, FILE

T. Boone Pickens, 91 T. Boone Pickens, a self-made oil tycoon and venture capitalist from Texas, died on Sept. 11 at the age of 91. Pickens founded what later became Mesa Petroleum in 1957, and left it in 1996 to form the energy-focused investment firm BP Capital. Pickens was a longtime supporter of his alma mater, Oklahoma State University and contributed more than $500 million to the school over the years. Pickens was also a famous philanthropist through his own foundation, the T. Boone Pickens Foundation, which he founded in 2006. <br><br>Pickens in his office in Dallas, Texas, Jan. 12, 2009. Matt Nager/The New York Times via Redux

Robert Frank, 94 Photographer and filmmaker Robert Frank is considered one of the most influential figures in the history of photography. He is best known for his book "The Americans" that captured a new perspective of life in the United States. <br><br>Here, Robert Frank poses barefoot on an Oldsmobile in Florida, circa 1984, in a photo made by Allen Ginsberg.<br><br> <a href="https://abcnews.go.com/Photos/iconic-photographer-robert-frank-americans-dead-94/story?id=65520197&cid=clicksource_4380645_null_bsq_image"target="external">Iconic photographer Robert Frank, known for 'The Americans,' dead at 94</a> Allen Ginsberg Llc/Corbis via Getty Images

Peter Lindbergh, 74 Fashion Photographer Peter Lindbergh is often credited for the rise of the supermodel for his work with '90s supermodels like Naomi Campbell, Cindy Crawford, Kate Moss and Linda Evangelista. Lindbergh is world-renowned for his black and white images which have graced the covers of Vogue and Harper's Bazaar. Lindbergh photographed Meghan Markle for the October 2017 cover of Vanity Fair and then again for the September issue of British Vogue, where the Duchess of Sussex was a guest editor. Peter Lindbergh died on Sept. 3, at the age of 74. Maurice Haas/13 Photo/Redux for IWC

Valerie Harper, 80 Actress Valerie Harper, is best known for her role as Rhoda Morgenstern in "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" and it's spin-off "Rhoda." She began her career as a dancer on Broadway before making the switch to TV and film. Her portrayal of Rhoda Morgenstern earned her a Golden Globe award and four Emmy's as well. Harper is photographed here for Simon & Schuster, Jan. 15, 2013, in Los Angeles. Blake Little/Contour by Getty Images

Cedric Benson, 36 Former NFL running back Cedric Benson died in a motorcycle crash in Texas, Aug. 17, 2019. Benson attended the University of Texas at Austin. His 5,540 rushing yards for the Longhorns still ranks second in school history. Benson was drafted No. 4 overall by the Chicago Bears in 2005. He also played for the Cincinnati Bengals and Green Bay Packers. <br><br>Cedric Benson #32 of the Cincinnati Bengals looks on during the game against the Pittsburgh Steelers, Nov. 13, 2011, in Cincinnati. Joe Robbins/Getty Images

Peter Fonda, 79 Acting legend Peter Fonda had a long career in film, spanning decades. In 1969, he starred and co-wrote "Easy Rider," earning his first Academy Award nomination for the screenplay. In 1997, he earned another nomination for his acting alongside Patricia Richardson in the film, "Ulee's Gold," in which he played a reclusive beekeeper trying to get keep his family together. Fonda was an avid motorcycle enthusiast and was even inducted into the AMA Motorcycle Hall of Fame. He died on Aug. 16 at the age of 79. <br><br>Peter Fonda seen here in a scene from "Easy Rider." Bettmann Archive via Getty Images

Toni Morrison, 88 Pulitzer Prize-winning author Toni Morrison wrote poetic depictions of Black America in such novels as "Song of Solomon," "The Bluest Eye," "Jazz" and "Beloved," which was made into a film starring Oprah Winfrey. Morrison taught at Howard University, the State University of New York and at Princeton University, where she continued to write. She received the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1993, becoming the first African-American woman to be selected. In 2012, Morrison received the Presidential Medal of Freedom. She died on Aug. 5 at age 88. <br><br> Author Toni Morrison at home in 1992. James Keyser/The LIFE Images Collection via Getty Images

Harold Prince, 91 Harold (Hal) Prince was a Broadway titan, producing iconic shows like "Damn Yankees," "West Side Story" and "Fiddler on the Roof." He went on to make hits including "Cabaret," "Company," "Follies," "Evita," and "Phantom of the Opera." "All of modern musical theater owes practically everything to him," Sir Andrew Lloyd Webber told the Associated Press.</br></br>Harold Prince during a 2006 concert in New York’s Central Park, June 26, 2006. G. Gershoff/WireImage via Getty Images, FILE

Russi Taylor, 75 Russi Taylor was best known for voicing the Disney character Minnie Mouse. In 1986, Taylor beat out hundreds of other hopefuls to become the voice of Minnie in movies, TV shows and theme park experiences. Taylor married Wayne Allwine, the voice of Mickey Mouse beginning in 1977, in 1991. She passed away on Saturday, July 26, 2019 in Glendale, Calif. She was 75 years old. </br></br> Russi Taylor is seen here on Jan. 22, 2018, at a star ceremony in celebration of the 90th anniversary of Disney's Minnie Mouse at the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Alberto E. Rodriguez/Getty Images, File

Robert Morgenthau, 99 Former Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau spent his over three decade career prosecuting for the city of New York. From mob bosses to media moguls to hardened criminals, Morgenthau was no stranger to high-profile cases; including trying the "Central Park 5." His legacy and reputation for fairness live on as prosecutor Adam Schiff on the long-running TV series, "Law & Order." </br></br>Robert Morgenthau, District Attorney of New York County, poses for a portrait in a courtroom, April 26, 2000. Karjean Levine/Getty Images, FILE

John Paul Stevens, 99 A former lawyer, John Paul Stevens served on the bench of the United States Supreme court as Associate Justice from 1975 until his retirement in 2010. Appointed by President Ford, Justice Stevens voted on several key issues and was known for his more conservative ruling yet more liberal views on social issues like abortion and gay rights. Stevens died on July 16 at the age of 99. </br></br>Justice John Paul Stevens is seen in his chambers in this undated photo. Library Of Congress/Corbis via Getty Images

Pernell Whitaker, 55 Pernell "Sweet Pea" Whitaker was a legendary fighter. He won an Olympic gold medal in 1984, and between 1993 and 1997, he won the world championship four times in four different weight classes. Some consider him to be the best defensive boxer of all time. He was elected into the International Boxing Hall Of Fame in 2006. Pernell Whitaker died on July 14 at the age of 55.<br><br> Here, WBC welterweight champion Pernell Whitaker, delivers a right to the head of challenger Jake Rodriguez during their bout in Atlantic City, N.J., Nov. 18, 1995. Donna Connor/AP, FILE

Rip Torn, 88 Actor Rip Torn, a star on the HBO series "The Larry Sanders Show," has died at the age of 88, his representatives confirmed. Torn "passed away peacefully July 9, 2019 at his home in Connecticut," according to a statement. Torn spent seven decades in productions on both the stage and screen, and received an Emmy Award in 1996 for "The Larry Sanders Show." Nominated for the same award five more times, he was also an Oscar and Tony Award nominee, and received six consecutive Emmy nods for his work on "The Larry Sanders Show."<br><br> Rip Torn during 2005 Sundance Film Festival in Park City, Utah. J. Vespa/WireImage/Getty Images

Ross Perot, 89 Ross Perot, a self-made billionaire, philanthropist and two-time presidential candidate, died, July 9, 2019, at 89. Running as an independent in 1992, Perot garnered nearly 19% of the vote and flummoxed rivals Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush. A Texan and founder of Electronic Data Systems Corp., he became a multimillionaire when he took the company public in 1968 and a billionaire when GM bought the company in 1984. <br><br>Independent presidential candidate Ross Perot addresses the audience at a campaign rally in Dallas, Nov. 2, 1992. Ron Heflin/AP

Cameron Boyce, 20 Actor Cameron Boyce, known for his roles in the Disney Channel franchise "Descendants" and the TV show "Jessie," has died. He was 20 years old. <br><br> The cause of death was announced as due to "an ongoing medical condition." Boyce first achieved stardom as one of the leads in the show, "Jessie," starring as character Luke Ross. Boyce's role in the "Descendants" catapulted him to even greater heights. The young actor had dedicated himself to charity work in recent years. <br> <br> Cameron Boyce at Disneyland Park, California on July 13, 2017. Image Group La/Disney Channel

Joao Gilberto, 88 Brazilian singer, songwriter and guitarist Joao Gilberto pioneered the musical genre of bossa nova in the late 1950s. By the early 60s bossa nova had been embraced by jazz musicians and it was through a collaboration with saxophonist Stan Getz that produced one of the best-selling jazz albums of all time, "Getz/Gilberto." It was on this record that Gilberto's then-wife Astrud sang "The Girl from Ipanema" which became a worldwide hit. Gilberto died on July 6, 2019, in Rio de Janeiro. He was 88. <br><br> Gilberto circa 1970. Michael Ochs Archives/Getty Images

Eva Kor, 85 Holocaust survivor Eva Moses Kor was born in a small village in Romania in 1934. Ten years later, her family was sent to the Auschwitz-Birkenau concentration camp in Poland where she and her twin sister were subjected to the experiments of Josef Mengele. They were freed when the camp was liberated in January 1945, and Kor eventually settled in America where she founded a Holocaust museum and advocated for forgiveness. She died on July 4 at the age of 85.<br><br>Here, Eva Kor poses for a photo while attending a ceremony to mark the 60th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, Jan. 27, 2005. Bjorn Steinz/panos Pictures via Redux, FILE

Christopher Cline, 60 Billionaire coal tycoon, Christopher Cline, died just before his 61st birthday in a helicopter crash, July 4, in the Bahamas. A West Virginia native, Cline started working in the coal mines as a young man and founded Cline Group just 10 years later. He founded Forsight Energy to bet on a mine in Illinois in 2006 that made his fortune. His wife died of breast cancer in 1987 and he later dated Elin Nordegren, Tiger Wood's ex-wife. Cline donated to Republicans and gave a $5 million endowment to West Virginia School of Medicine and another $5 million to his alma mater, Marshall University. Bloomberg/Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg via Getty Images

Lee Iacocca, 94 Lee Iacocca, an automotive pioneer who helped launch the Ford Mustang and several popular designs for Chrysler, including the minivan and the Chrysler K-car, died on July 2. He was 94. On top of launching popular cars, Iacocca helped engineer Chrysler's great comeback in the 1980s and kept the company at the top of the automotive industry.<br><br>Ford Motor Co. president Lee Iacocca leans against a Ford Mustang, circa 1974. John Olson/The LIFE Images Collection via Getty Images, FILE

Judith Krantz, 91 Bestselling author, Judith Krantz, was known for her romance novels, such as "Scruples" and "Princess Daisy," that depicted glamour and lavish lifestyles. Her books have been translated into multiple languages and millions of copies have been sold worldwide. Many were also adapted for television. AP reported Judith Krantz died on June 22, at the age of 91. <br><br> Judith Krantz poses by her swimming pool in 1986. Terry O'Neill/Getty Images

Gloria Vanderbilt, 95 Heiress, socialite, actress and author Gloria Vanderbilt pent her life in the spotlight, as the only daughter of railroad magnate Reginald Vanderbilt and his second wife. She studied acting and art and also became an international fashion model. Vanderbilt had two children, Carter Cooper and CNN News Anchor Anderson Cooper. Vanderbilt died on June 17 at the age of 95. <br><br> Vanderbilt on Aug. 23, 1954. Intercontinentale/AFP/Getty Images

Franco Zeffirelli, 96 Franco Zeffirelli, the famed Italian play, theater and opera producer, died on June 15 at age 96. Zeffirelli's 1968 adaption of "Romeo and Juliet" that dazzled audiences around the world earned him an Oscar nomination for best director. After reports of his death, a message on his foundation's website said, "Ciao Maestro." <br><br> Franco Zeffirelli is pictured in New York, in Oct. 31, 1974. Jerry Mosey/AP

Dr. John, 77 Malcolm John Rebennack, the New Orleans-born singer and songwriter known by his stage name, Dr. John, died from a heart attack on June 6 at the age of 77. The Rock & Roll Hall of Fame inductee and six-time Grammy winner forged a unique sound that combined jazz, funk, blues, rock and boogie together in a Crescent City gumbo of musical fusion featured on his 1973 hit single "Right Place, Wrong Time." <br><br> Dr. John performs at the Mighty Mississippi Music Festival on Oct. 5, 2014, in Greenville, Miss. Ronald C. Modra/Getty Images

Leah Chase, 96 Leah Chase, the legendary New Orleans chef and civil rights icon died on June 1, at age 96. Chase was the wife of the late Edgar "Dooky" Chase Jr., whose father’s legendary Crescent City “Dooky Chase’s Restaurant” served as a safe haven where civil rights leaders including Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Thurgood Marshall gathered to strategize, and has remained a family-owned and operated restaurant since it’s opening in 1941. <br><br> Chef Leah Chase in the kitchen of Dooky Chase in New Orleans, Jan. 19, 2015. Paul Natkin/Getty Images

Bill Buckner, 69 Red Sox legend Bill Buckner played first base for Boston's Major League Baseball team. During his 22-season career, he played for the Los Angeles Dodgers, Chicago Cubs, Boston Red Sox, California Angels, and Kansas City Royals. Buckner died on May 27, 2019, following a battle with Lewy Body Dementia. He was 69. <br><br>Buckner is introduced during a 1986 20-year team reunion, May 25, 2016, at Fenway Park in Boston. Billie Weiss/boston Red Sox/Getty Images

Bart Starr, 85 Famed NFL player and coach Bart Starr was the only quarterback in NFL history to lead a team to three consecutive league championships. During Starr's time as quarterback for the Green Bay Packers, he led his team to victories in the NFL's first two Super Bowls, where he was named MVP for both games. Starr won the league MVP award in 1966 and was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame and the Packers Hall of Fame in 1977. Bart Starr died on May 26 at the age of 85. <br><br> Starr circa 1965. Focus On Sport/Getty Images

Niki Lauda, 70 Formula One Champion Niki Lauda, who survived a near fatal crash during the 1976 German Grand Prix, died on May 21. Lauda’s crash in his F1 Ferrari left him with severe burns that covered his whole head. He would make a remarkable recovery and win the Grand Prix in 1984, adding to his F1 drivers’ championship wins in 1975 and 1977. <br><br> Lauda’s life story was later made into the movie “Rush,” directed by Ron Howard. National Motor Museum/Heritage Images/Getty Images

Sammy Shore, 92 Actor and standup comedian Sammy Shore spent his nearly seven-decade career doing standup as an opening act for performers such as Elvis Presley, Barbra Streisand and Sammy Davis Jr. He co-founded the famous Los Angeles comedy club, the Comedy Store. Shore was the father of actor-comedian Pauly Shore. He died at his home in Las Vegas at 92. <br><br>Shore performs at the Friars Club of California event honoring television comedy writer Buddy Arnold, Nov. 28, 2001, in Beverly Hills, Calif. Sammy Shore died on May 18 at the age of 92. Frederick M. Brown/Getty Images

I. M. Pei, 102 Architect I. M. Pei, best known for designing the glass pyramid for the Musée du Louvre in Paris, has died. The world-renowned architect's work includes the John F. Kennedy Library in Massachusetts, the Javits Convention Center in New York and the East Building of the National Gallery of Art in Washington D.C. Pei died on May 16 at the age of 102. <br><br> Pei poses in front of the Louvre glass pyramid, in the museum's Napoleon Courtyard, prior to its inauguration by French President Francois Mitterrand, March 29, 1989, in Paris. Pierre Gleizes/AP

Tim Conway, 85 Comic actor Tim Conway, best known for his work on "The Carol Burnett Show," fostered a career in television that lasted over 50 years and earned him multiple Emmy awards for performances and writing. More recently, he appeared on shows like "30 Rock and "Glee" and voiced a character on the children's show "SpongeBob SquarePants." The Associated Press reported his death on May 14, 2019 at the age of 85.<br><br>Here he poses for a promotional photo for "The Tim Conway Show," in December 1969. CBS Photo Archive/Getty Images

Doris Day, 97 Actress and singer Doris Day starred in top films from the 1950s and 1960s, such as "Calamity Jane," "The Pajama Game," "Pillow Talk" and the TV sitcom, "The Doris Day Show." Born Doris von Kappelhoff in Cincinnati, she started as a dancer, but turned to singing after a car accident in her teens. While acting, she continued her music and recorded hits such as "Love Somebody" with Buddy Clark. She was a awarded the Cecil B. DeMille Award for Lifetime Achievement in 1989 and a Hollywood star in 2004. After retiring, Day devoted her time to animal welfare. She died on May 13 at the age of 97. Archive Photos/Getty Images

Peggy Lipton, 72 Actress Peggy Lipton rose to fame as Julie Barnes on "The Mod Squad" for which she won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress. Throughout her 50-year career in television, film, and on stage she played many roles which includes starring in David Lynch's "Twin Peaks" as Norma Jennings. Lipton was married to musician Quincy Jones and together they had two daughters Rashida Jones and Kidada Jones, who also became actresses. Lipton died, May 11, 2019, after a battle with cancer. She was 72. <br><br> Peggy Lipton pictured on Aug. 19, 1970. Vernon Merritt Iii/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images

Jim Fowler, 89 Naturalist and wildlife expert Jim Fowler hosted the award-winning "Mutual of Omaha's Wild Kingdom" TV show, along with Marlin Perkins. Fowler regularly appeared on "The Tonight Show," bringing with him all kinds of furry, feathered and scaly critters. He turned down offers to play professional baseball while in college in order to stay focused on zoology -- ultimately becoming an internationally-recognized authority on predatory birds. He made it his personal mission to help inform the public about the animal world and how to protect it. Fowler died on May 8, 2019 at the age of 89. Mutual of Omaha's Wild Kingdom

Peter Mayhew, 74 Peter Mayhew, best known for his iconic role as the wookie Chewbacca in the original "Star Wars" trilogy, has died at 74. Mayhew brought the iconic role to life and made Chewbacca a household name as the series grew to cult fame. He even reprised his role in the latest installments to the series before passing the torch to Joonas Suotamo. Peter Mayhew died April 30 at the age of 74.</br></br>Mayhew is seen here at the world premiere of "Star Wars: The Last Jedi" in Los Angeles, Sept. 12, 2017. Danny Moloshok/Reuters, FILE

John Singleton, 51 Director, screenwriter, and producer John Singleton was best known for his iconic film "Boyz n the Hood." For this film, Singleton became the first African American and at 24 the youngest person to have ever been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director. <br><br> Singleton died April 29, 2019, several days after he suffered a stroke. He was 51. Jerry Watson/Camera Press via Redux

John Havlicek, 79 The Boston Celtics announced on April 25, 2019, that John Havlicek, who ESPN calls, "one of the greatest players in the history of one of the sport's most decorated franchises," died. He played 16 seasons with the Celtics, winning 8 NBA championships and an NBA Finals MVP, and has been inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame. John Halvicek died on April 25 at the age of 79.<br><br>Here, Havlicek poses for a portrait in 1974 at the Boston Garden. Dick Raphael/NBAE/Getty Images

Georgia Engel, 70 Actress Georgia Engel, best known for her role as Georgette Franklin on the "The Mary Tyler Moore Show," had a career in TV and film that spanned decades. She continued to star on several successful television shows including “Everybody Loves Raymond,” from which she received two of her five Primetime Emmy Award nominations. Georgia Engel died on April 12 at the age of 70. <br><br> Engel in a photograph circa 1993. Jack Mitchell/Getty Images

Nipsey Hussle, 33 Grammy-nominated rapper Nipsey Hussle from South Los Angeles, was gunned down outside his clothing store at the age of 33. Born Ermias Asghedom, Hussle grew up in the L.A. neighborhood of Crenshaw and was involved in street gangs in his early years. Rising to fame in the mid-2000's with a series of mixtapes, he was nominated for a Grammy for his 2018 album, "Victory Lap." Hussle invested in community development where he grew up and was due to meet with police officials to talk about ending gang violence and helping kids the day he died. Nipsey Hussle died on March 31 at the age of 33. Earl Gibson III/Getty Images

Jerrie Cobb, 88 Jerrie Cobb became the first woman to pass all the preflight tests for being an astronaut in 1961. Though she pushed for equality in space, none of the 13 women who ultimately passed the arduous test, known as the Mercury 13, got to fly. It wasn't until 1983 that NASA launched the first woman into space, 20 years later than the Russians, but Cobb was an inspiration to many. After leaving NASA, Cobb served as humanitarian aid pilot in the Amazon. <br><br>Jerrie Cobb with a display of rockets at a national conference where the leading space experts gathered in Tulsa, Okla., May 26, 1961. William P. Straeter/AP

Luke Perry, 52 Actor Luke Perry had a long-running career in television, rising to fame in the 1990s with the hit show "Beverly Hills, 90210," where he played bad boy Dylan McKay, and later finding a second renewal in his career with the role of Fred Andrews on "Riverdale." After being hospitalized for a massive stroke, Perry died on March 4 at age 52. <br><br>Luke Perry poses for a portrait during the 2018 Television Critics Association Summer Press Tour for "Riverdale," Aug. 6, 2018, in Beverly Hills, Calif. Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP

Keith Flint, 49 English musician Keith Flint garnered fame in the techno world by combining his fiery stage presence with breakbeat, acid house techno. Flint co-founded the electronic dance music group The Prodigy, producing hits like "Firestarter" and "Breathe," which became popular club staples in the late 1990s. Flint was found unresponsive at his home near London on March 4, 2019. He was 49. <br><br>Keith Flint of The Prodigy headlines the Other stage on the last day of Glastonbury Festival at Worthy Farm, June 28, 2009, in Glastonbury, England. Tabatha Fireman/Redferns/Getty Images

Andre Previn, 89 Composer and conductor Andre Previn enjoyed a celebrated career in music, working with symphony orchestras in Pittsburgh, London and Los Angeles to arrange classical works for performances, along with writing music for films. His musical compositions earned him four Academy Awards and numerous Grammys throughout his decades-long career. Andre Previn died on Feb. 28 at the age of 89. <br><br> Here, Andre Previn conducts a performance with the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, July 1, 1984. John Kaplan/Pittsburgh Post-Gazette/AP, FILE

Carrie Ann Lucas, 47 Carrie Ann Lucas was a lawyer and an advocate that worked tirelessly for disability rights. She filed a law suit against Kmart in 1999 for greater disability access and finally won the case in 2006. In 2017 she participated in a sit-in at Senator Cory Gardner's office in Denver against repealing the Affordable Care Act. Carrie Ann Lucas died on Feb. 24, 2019. Ali Bibbo/Emerge Colorado

Katherine Helmond, 89 Actress Katherine Helmond, best known for her role as the sassy matriarch Mona on "Who's The Boss?", had a career in TV and film that spanned decades. Helmond earned several nominations for her television roles, as well as a Tony nomination for work in "The Vagina Monolgues." <br><br>Katherine Helmond poses for a promotional portrait as her character Mona Robinson, for "Who's The Boss?" Katherine Helmond died on Feb 28 at the age of 89. ABC via Getty Images

Peter Tork, 77 Musician Peter Tork was best known as the bass guitarist in the television rock band The Monkees, who produced several hit songs including, "Daydream Believer," "I'm a Believer," and "Last Train to Clarksville." Unlike some of his bandmates, Tork had studied music since childhood and was an accomplished multi-instrumentalist before he landed the role. He died on Feb. 21 at 77. <br><br>Here, Tork poses for a photo on the set of the television show "The Monkees" in Los Angeles, circa May 1967. Michael Ochs Archives via Getty Images

Don Newcombe, 92 Don Newcombe, pictured in March 1956, was one of the first black players in the major leagues. The hard-throwing Brooklyn Dodgers pitcher went on to win Rookie of the Year, Most Valuable Player and Cy Young awards. He died early on Feb. 19 at the age of 92. AP

Karl Lagerfeld, 85 German born fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld became creative director of French fashion house Chanel in 1983. Lagerfeld was the force behind the luxury brand's success, breathing new life into the staid company. A prolific designer, he tirelessly churned out new collections up until his death. He was instantly recognizable with his ponytail, black suits and dark sunglasses. He was believed to have been 85 when he died on Feb. 19. <br><br> Fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld at Chanel in Paris, March 5, 1984. Corbis via Getty Images

George Mendonsa, 95 According to the Associated Press, former sailor George Mendonsa, credited as being in one of the most iconic pictures of the 20th century, died on Feb. 17 at the age of 95.<br><br>Pictured, George Mendonsa holds a copy of Alfred Eisenstaedt's photo of a sailor kissing a young woman in the middle of a jubilant crowd in Times Square, celebrating the news that Japan had surrendered to the United States, Aug. 14, 1945. Hartford Courant/TNS via Getty Images