Park closed during coronavirus? Look to wetlands to get...

During shelter-in-place, balancing time outside while staying close to home can be difficult: certain parks are off limits, parking lots are closed and authorities are increasingly on patrol to keep people moving along.

In many cases, marsh wetlands on the shore of the bay can offer an answer.

The greater Bay Area has more than 20 wetland marshes that provide nesting and nursery habitat for resident waterfowl and shorebirds, and food and resting habitat for migrants. Many are within short range of Bay Area residents.

Amid the coronavirus pandemic, most marshes and their trails are open to visits. Before leaving your home, check online with your local destination for the latest rules and closures. Walk or ride a bike to the trailhead, if possible. Adhere to all guidelines for shelter-in-place and social distancing.

Although the pandemic has many people concerned for their safety, birds don’t know the difference. There’s a wide array of species in the marshes this spring, plus fresh air and plenty of room on the trail for visitors. Print or clip my personal sightings list, more than 70 species of shorebirds, waders, ducks, geese and raptors, and create your own life list.

This is not the time for a road trip, of course. If you go, choose a marsh near your residence.

The adjacent region-by-region list details which marshes are closed, which are open, and the basic rules for access for each.

In many cases, such as at Point Reyes National Seashore, all state parks, and several other destinations, including the Martin Luther King Jr. Regional Shoreline, all parking and access roads are closed. In the South Bay, Coyote Point Recreation Area (shutdown 24/7) and Ravenswood Open Space (open weekdays) are shut down for the coming weekend.

Some of the greater expanses that are open include the Grizzly Island Wildlife Area near Suisun City, which is part of an 88,000-acre matrix of wetlands, sloughs, marsh and uplands. The Department of Fish and Wildlife has verified more than 220 bird species that includes 25 waterfowl species, nine species of raptors that includes bald eagles and peregrine falcons. A driving tour is open and provides access to trailheads.

Another vast habitat is the Napa-Sonoma Marshes Wildlife Area, which is roughly north of Highway 37, and connects to 50,000 acres of contiguous wetlands roughly between Novato and Napa. Kayaking at high tides in the matrix of sloughs allows a gateway to a world where leave the rest of civilization far behind. Many years ago, I saw my first peregrine falcon here.

Along South San Francisco Bay, the Palo Alto Baylands, at 1,600 acres, has access rules more consistent with smaller marshes along the shore of the bay, just as at Crissy Field/East Beach and Candlestick State Recreation Area in San Francisco, several of the marshes on the Marin shoreline. All parking and vehicle access is banned. If you can ride a bike to the trailhead on a weekday morning, you might have such a spot yourself, that is, just the birds and you.

Tom Stienstra is The Chronicle’s outdoor writer. Email: tstienstra@sfchronicle.com. Twitter: @StienstraTom.

Wetlands: What’s open, what’s closed

San Francisco

Access: Visitors can access on foot and bicycle at Crissy Field/East Beach, and at Candlestick Park State Recreation Area. Parking and vehicle access is closed.

Contact: Pacific West Information Center, www.nps.gov/goga; San Francisco Presidio, www.nps.gov/prsf; California State Parks, Bay Area District, www.parks.ca.gov.

North Bay

Access: Drive-in access, parking, trails open at Grizzly Island Wildlife Area. Trail access permitted at Bothin Marsh, Novato Marsh, Corte Madera Ecological Reserve, Napa-Sonoma Marshes Wildlife Area. Kayak-in access is permitted at Napa-Sonoma Marshes Wildlife Area, Richardson Bay, Petaluma Marsh. Parking and vehicle access is closed at all state parks, most of Point Reyes National Seashore, and Marin county parks and open space (including Bolinas Lagoon).

Contacts: Grizzly Island, Napa-Sonoma Marshes wildlife areas, https://wildlife.ca.gov/Regions/3; Marin County Parks and Open Space, www.marincountyparks.org; California State Parks, www.parks.ca.gov; Point Reyes National Seashore, www.nps.gov/pore.

Peninsula

Access: Ravenswood Preserve is open on weekdays, closed on weekends. Trail access is permitted at Palo Alto Baylands, Redwood Creek estuary, Shoreline at Mountain View (with limited parking), Pescadero Marsh, San Gregorio Lagoon. Parking and vehicle access is closed at Palo Alto Baylands, Pillar Point Harbor, Pescadero State Beach and all state parks. Coyote Point County Park is closed to all visitors.

Contacts: Palo Alto Baylands, www.cityofpaloalto.org; Midpeninsula Open Space District, www.openspace.org; City of Mountain View, www.mountainview.gov; California State Parks, www.parks.ca.gov.

East Bay

Access: Don Edwards SF Bay National Wildlife Refuge (out of Newark), Eden Landing Wildlife Area, Hayward, Point Pinole, Big Break and Martinez regional shorelines are open with parking and access by trail. Bethel Island boat ramp is open for access by boat/kayak to San Joaquin Delta. No parking at Miller-Knox Regional Shoreline, Robert Crown Memorial State Beach. Point Isabel is closed, with walk-in access open to Bay Trail. Martin Luther King Jr. is closed with walk-in access only available at Swan Way/Arrowowhead Staging Area.

Contacts: East Bay Regional Park District, www.ebparks.org; Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge, www.fws.gov -- click on Find an office or a refuge; California State Parks, www.parks.ca.gov.

South Bay

Access: Don Edwards SF Bay National Wildlife Refuge (out of Alviso or San Jose), Shoreline Regional Park (with limited parking), Sunnyvale Baylands Park are open with parking and access by trail.

Contacts: Don Edwards San Francisco Bay National Wildlife Refuge, www.fws.gov -- click on Find an office or a refuge; Shoreline at Mountain view, www.mountainview.gov; Sunnyvale Baylands, https://sunnyvale.ca.gov.

Note: Before leaving your home, contact your local destination for latest rules and closures. Walk or ride a bike to the trailhead if possible. Adhere to all guidelines for shelter-in-place and social distancing.