SALT LAKE CITY — Javelin Guidry made quite an impression at the NFL Scouting Combine. According to ESPN, the former Utah nickel back became the first player since 2006 to post a sub-4.3 time in the 40 and also exceed 20 reps in the 225-pound bench press.

The two-time Pac-12 honorable mention selection enters the upcoming NFL draft as someone to watch, that is if folks are able to keep an eye on him.

“You can’t coach speed and he’s got it. He’s got a ton of speed,” said Utah defensive coordinator Morgan Scalley. “He’s a willing tackler and some team is going to get a steal with this kid because not many guys are ever going to run away from him.”

Besides that, Scalley noted that Guidry is a “great kid off the field as well.” That includes athletics. He holds the distinction of winning high school championships in two populous states in the 100 meters — 2016 in Texas and 2017 in California.

“Obviously his most redeeming quality is that speed,” said Utah coach Kyle Whittingham. “That’s obviously Jav’s strong suit is his incredible speed. He’s also extremely tough and has for us played that nickel position extremely well.”

In 41 games at Utah, Guidry tallied 120 tackles (82 solo) with 19 passes defended and three interceptions. The 5-foot-9, 193-pound defensive back made 25 starts over the 2017, 2018 and 2019 seasons.

“My experience there was unreal, the greatest experience of my life,” Guidry said. “I was able to grow as a man and as a football player as well. It was a great time for me.”

Guidry, who ultimately chose Utah over Texas, credits Whittingham, Scalley and cornerbacks coach Sharrieff Shah for helping him out a lot. He said they’ve been very supportive and helped gather information for him to weigh in deciding to enter the NFL draft.

Opting to forgo his senior season was something Guidry has thought about for some time.

“It was always in my mind when I first came to Utah. I wanted to do three years, that was my goal,” Guidry said. “Towards the end of the year I just talked to my family and was still going through the season, but just kept it in my mind and after the last game I talked to my family again and made the decision.”

Guidry wound up being one of eight Utes invited to the NFL combine. He takes pride in having been part of such a deep defense at Utah, praising his teammates and coaches.

“It was a fun group,” Guidry said. “They were all my brothers — everyone on the team was my brothers — and we were very talented last season. We had great memories together at Utah. So it was great.”

Now comes the next phase of his career. It began with a splash at the combine, where Guidry had 21 reps — fifth-highest among defensive back — in the bench press. His time of 4.29 in the 40 was the second-fastest overall, trailing only Alabama receiver Henry Ruggs III (4.27).

“Being able to go to new spots and earn a spot and prove myself is what I’ve known my whole life. I’m ready to do that at the next level.” — Javelin Guidry

“I wanted to be the fastest one there,” Guidry said. “But I was pleased with my time. I worked real hard and to be able to run that time was a great feeling.”

Things went so well, in fact, that Guidry is letting the numbers sit and is not going to participate in any private pro day or anything like it. The coronavirus pandemic has tempered predraft activity from its usual norm.

“I’m still getting very excited. It’s been an unfortunate process with the virus going around, but you just keep going,” Guidry said. “Every single day is a new day so you just keep going. I’ve still been able to talk to teams on FaceTime and calls so it’s been a great experience.”

Guidry, who has been told he’ll likely go in the fourth or fifth round, is taking a wait-and-see approach as the draft approaches. He’d obviously like to be picked higher, but reasons that it’s really all about what you do when you get to the NFL. Guidry is determined to work hard, make the team that drafts him and help them in any way he can.

After attending three different high schools because of family moves, Guidry has plenty of experience assimilating to new surroundings.

“Being able to go to new spots and earn a spot and prove myself is what I’ve known my whole life,” he said. “I’m ready to do that at the next level.”

As for the draft, Guidry plans to watch it on television in California. He’s also going to keep a watchful eye on friends and former teammates expected to be taken

“I think I’m just going to stay home and just be like on my mom’s nice white couch,” Guidry said. “So we’ll just be sitting there waiting on the call.”

•. •. •

What they’re saying about Javelin Guidry ...

NFL.COM: “Priority free agent.”

BLEACHER REPORT: 7th round, 217th overall — San Francisco 49ers

DRAFTSITE: 3rd round, 101st overall — Seattle Seahawks

PRO FOOTBALL NETWORK: 6th round, 182nd overall — Denver Broncos

SPORTING NEWS: 7th round, 217the overall — San Francisco 49ers

USA TODAY: 6th round, 187th overall — Cleveland Browns