CLOSE

Arizona will have two drive-thru testing options and some access to antibody testing for COVID-19 for frontline workers, Gov. Doug Ducey announced Tuesday at a press conference.

Increased testing is key to understanding the true spread of the virus in Arizona and is a critical factor in whether or how the state can begin relaxing any social distancing measures or the stay-at-home order.

Arizona had, so far, conducted more than 44,000 tests, largely at private labs, according to the latest numbers released by the state Tuesday. But testing has been extremely limited, and those with more mild symptoms are unlikely to be able to get tested.

"We need more, a lot more," Ducey said. "And there’s not a governor in the country who doesn't need more testing, with a greater availability of testing and more rapid turnaround of results."

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coronavirus coverage relating to public safety free of charge. Support The Republic by subscribing to azcentral.com.

Walgreens will open two drive-thru testing sites in Arizona, Ducey said. It is not yet clear where the two testing sites will be, he said, but once the locations are known, they will be posted on azhealth.gov.

Arizona also has received 15 Abbott Laboratories testing machines, which can rapidly conduct COVID-19 tests, and those machines will be distributed to test vulnerable populations, Ducey said.

And the University of Arizona will partner with the state to create 250,000 antibody tests that will identify whether a person has had COVID-19, likely one of the largest-scale antibody testing projects in the country, if not the largest. Those tests will go toward health care workers and first responders.

Ducey also issued three executive orders Tuesday related to health care, including certification changes for caregivers, additional data-reporting requirements and telemedicine coverage for workers' compensation.

Dr. Cara Christ, the director of the Arizona Department of Health Services, said the state also is in conversations with CVS regarding testing. Testing could expand to more of the population once supply chain issues that are leading to a lack of supplies are addressed, she said.

"As soon as we get more test collection supplies, that's when we'll be able to open it up to everybody," Christ said.

What is antibody testing?

UA said it had received $3.5 million from the state to produce the antibody tests that will be used for frontline health care workers and first responders.

UA President Robert Robbins also wants all of the university's students, faculty and staff — 60,000 people in total — to be able to get antibody testing, he said at Tuesday's press conference. The university said in a press release that effort would be funded by private donations.

Robbins said he planned to volunteer to be the first person to get blood drawn for the antibody test next week because he believes he may have come in contact with the virus.

"I think I'm going to be the first one that will volunteer to get blood drawn next Monday,'' he said. "I''m going to film it, let everybody see how that all works. And I never bet much, usually no more than a dollar, but I bet I've got the antibodies, because even though I never had fever, I never had a cough, I think that with all the contacts I've had, I would be surprised if I don't have the antibodies."

Ducey also mentioned he had family members who were ill in the past two months who could benefit from antibody tests to understand if their illnesses were COVID-19.

Here's how antibody testing works: When people get sick, the body produces antibodies, which are proteins in the blood that rise up to fight infections as part of an immune response.

These antibodies can remain in the body for quite some time. Once a person has recovered from an infection, their blood contains antibodies that can help fend off the same infection should it return.

Antibody testing can see if a person shows markers of having had an infection that the body created antibodies to fight against. This kind of testing is not yet widely available to people who believe they may have had COVID-19.

"Determining whether a significant percentage of individuals have COVID-19 antibodies is critical to returning to regular social interaction," Dr. Michael D. Dake, senior vice president for University of Arizona Health Sciences, who is overseeing production of the tests, said in a press release. "Through what we hope would eventually be a comprehensive testing program, the university and local health care facilities could begin working toward reestablishing fully operational learning and working environments."

Robbins said at the press conference that he thinks the 250,000 tests can be conducted within a month. He said testing could begin as early as next week, or by May 1 at the latest.

In a UA press call after the Ducey press conference, Dake said the scale of the UA antibody testing could be the largest in the country. Once this testing is fully ramped up, there could be about 5,000 tests done per day, Dake said.

He considers the effort to test frontline workers to be a first phase, and antibody testing could be more broadly available after that.

Dake said it could be valuable for other workers, such as those who work at grocery stores and restaurants, depending on how it progresses.

"Obviously, it has the potential to really inform going forward what we want to do with the rest of the citizens," Dake said, adding that the state has decided the initial $3.5 million should prioritize health care workers and emergency responders.

3 new executive orders on health

Ducey also issued three executive orders Tuesday.

One order will make available to first responders the addresses of people who have tested positive for COVID-19 in the previous 14 days. This information will not include the names of patients and is supposed to be kept confidential.

The order is bound to raise privacy concerns but in issuing it, the governor wrote that having the information would allow first responders to take necessary precautions when responding to calls for help.

Another order requires that workers' compensation insurance plans and self-insurance plans cover telemedicine visits.

And the third order allows for on-the-job training of caregivers in assisted living facilities.

Reach reporter Rachel Leingang by email at rachel.leingang@gannett.com or by phone at 602-444-8157, or find her on Twitter and Facebook.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-health/2020/04/14/ua-create-250-k-antibody-tests-walgreens-open-drive-thru-testing/2993536001/