Michael Sanchez, the brother of Jeff Bezos’ mistress, admitted that he struck a ‘deal with the devil’ and received $200,000 from the National Enquirer in exchange for helping the tabloid break the story of the Amazon CEO’s extramarital affair.

Sanchez said he did it to protect his sister, Lauren Sanchez, and her new flame, Bezos, because he wanted the news of their romance to become public after both of their spouses were told, according to Page Six.

It doesn’t appear as if Lauren Sanchez felt her brother’s intentions were good, as she cut ties with the man who is not only her sibling but was also a manager and publicist.

Though Michael Sanchez admits to revealing the affair and leaking text messages to the Enquirer, he adamantly denies obtaining intimate photos, including 'selfies' of Bezos' genitalia.

'I may have helped the Enquirer with their story,' he told Page Six.

Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos is seen left with Lauren Sanchez in Los Angeles in December 2016. Michael Sanchez is seen in the photo on the right

The Wall Street Journal reported that Sanchez's brother, Michael Sanchez (seen right with his sister), was paid $200,000 by the publisher of the National Enquirer for intimate text messages exchanged between his sister and Bezos

Bezos and Sanchez are yet to be seen in public as an official couple after the National Enquirer published a story in January about their affair and message exchange

'But I never had access to the penis selfies.'

It was those 'penis selfies' that Bezos says the Enquirer's parent company, American Media, Inc., was using to extort him.

The Wall Street Journal reported on Monday that AMI paid Michael Sanchez $200,000 to obtain intimate texts between the Amazon CEO and his sister.

The Journal's finding, attributed to people familiar with the matter, parallels the conclusion reached by private investigators working for Bezos as of early February.

Those investigators reportedly found that Michael Sanchez had leaked the texts to the Enquirer, although they didn't appear to conclude who might have paid for them.

Bezos has said AMI threatened to publish explicit photos of him unless he stopped investigating how the Enquirer obtained his private exchanges and publicly declared that the Enquirer's coverage of him was not politically motivated.

Last month, Bezos and Sanchez are reported to have enjoyed a secret reunion in one of Bezos' multi-million dollar Manhattan properties around Valentine's Day.

But Page Six reported on Tuesday that sources close to Bezos strongly deny that there was a date.

In fact, the two have not met up since the story of their relationship became public, according to a source.

'A lot of this has to do with their decision to lay low and spend time with their kids, who didn’t get a warning about the Enquirer story and now have to deal with the intense public interest and the paparazzi in pursuit,' a source told Page Six.

The source laid part of the blame on Michael Sanchez.

'Michael isn’t doing her and Jeff any favors by keeping his sister’s name in the press,' the source said.

'He may genuinely believe he is defending Lauren, but in many ways he is actually doing more to...doom her relationship with Jeff.'

The relationship between the siblings appears to be ruptured.

In the weeks following the National Enquirer's expose, Michael Sanchez contacted The Washington Post, the newspaper Bezos owns, to act as an 'off the record point of contact' for information about his sister.

'For obvious reasons, I can’t go into detail on email and all of my communications must be completely Confidential.

'I’m reaching out to you, off-the-record. I will be your single point-of-contact for anything Lauren-related. I’d appreciate it if we can keep open (one) line of communication,' he said in an email in January, 'days after' the Enquirer published its explosive piece.

As the weeks went by, details emerged that he was one of the people being questioned by Bezos' private security lead, Gavin De Becker, to identify the source of the leak.

De Becker has not named him explicitly as the source but he is the only person he has named as a subject of his investigation.

Multiple sources at AMI told The Daily Beast that it was Michael Sanchez who gave them the story and they have also claimed he acted as a leak for other clients.

In January, Bezos announced he was divorcing his wife of more than 26 years, MacKenzie Bezos (seen left with Jeff Bezos), just days before the Enquirer broke the story about his affair with Sanchez (right)

On Tuesday night, The Washington Post published its communication with Michael Sanchez and revealed the fact that he and Lauren were no longer speaking.

It also published, for the first time, details of his 2010 bankruptcy filing and the fact that Lauren, a former TV host turned pilot, had loaned him $165,000.

After the story went live, Michael Sanchez hit out angrily at its tone and said in an email to The Post: 'It’s pretty simple: Jeff Bezos had an extramarital affair, lied about it in his tone-deaf "divorce" tweet and has engaged in a scorched-earth campaign to cover up responsibility for the demise of two families and the failure to protect the privacy and technology of the man practically owns the cloud, culminating in a Washington Post hit piece written by Sarah Ellison, the writer I handpicked to tell the whole truth.'

According to the Post, Michael Sanchez has sold other clients' stories in the past. Among them is Scottie Nell Hughes.

She said she was 'heartbroken' to learn of a recording which proved Michael Sanchez had discussed details of her case against Fox News in 2017 with the publication.

Hughes sued the network alleging she was raped by Charles Payne.

In his interview with The Post, Michael Sanchez failed to mention that he and his sister had not spoken for weeks.

'I have been managing my sister since the day she came home from the hospital, for 49 years.

'That’s a message I want to be out there. Even when she and I have had fights when we were kids, in college, or whenever, if anyone says a word against her, I defend her and protect her to the end. That’s the essence of my relationship with my sister,' he said.

It seems however that it was Lauren Sanchez who was the protector in recent years, loaning her brother at least $165,000 when he field for bankruptcy in 2010 and giving him a job as her manager and publicist.

Bezos and Lauren Sanchez are yet to be seen in public as an official couple after the National Enquirer published a story in January about their affair and message exchange, hot off the back of Bezos' announcement on January 9, that he and wife MacKenzie were separating after 26 years of marriage.

Private investigators working for Bezos concluded that Michael Sanchez, who is a supporter of President Trump, leaked intimate text messages from the couple to one another to the National Enquirer.

In a interview with Vanity Fair, Michael Sanchez denied any involvement in the leak of 'below-the-belt selfies.'

'I had nothing to do with leak of the d**k pics. That's the important thing,' Sanchez said, adding it's 'likely' Lauren shared them.

Michael Sanchez played coy in that interview at one point saying: 'I'm not saying I didn't do something. Until I go under oath, what I can tell you now is that ever since April 20, when I met Jeff, my only goal has been to protect Jeff and Lauren.'

On February 7, Bezos penned a post on Medium including what he said were emails from Dylan Howard, the chief content officer of American Media (AMI), publisher of the National Enquirer, in which he threatens to release explicit photos and content relating to Bezos' relationship with Sanchez.

Chairman of AMI, David Pecker has denied the tabloid committed extortion or blackmail by threatening to publish the Amazon CEO's explicit photos.

In its initial story, the Enquirer said reporters followed Bezos and Sanchez 'across five states and 40,000 miles' and 'tailed them in private jets, swanky limos, helicopter rides, romantic hikes, five-star hotel hideaways, intimate dinner dates and 'quality time' in hidden love nests.'