The Trump administration applauded Mexico for using its military like a human wall along its southern border with Guatemala to block several thousand people in a caravan from passing through this week.

“The efforts by the Mexican National Guard and other officials have thus far been effective at maintaining the integrity of their border, despite outbreaks of violence and lawlessness by people who are attempting to illegally enter Mexico on their way to the United States,” acting Homeland Security Secretary Chad Wolf said in a statement issued Wednesday. “DHS is monitoring the caravan closely, we have dozens of personnel on the ground in Central America assisting local immigration and security officials, which have already led to hundreds of individuals being stopped, apprehended and sent back to their home countries.”

Mark Morgan, the acting commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, also praised Mexico for its role in denying entry to those who sought to move through the country and toward the U.S. southern border.

“Appreciate the Government of Mexico’s commitment to enforcing safe, orderly and lawful migration. Mexico continues to be a true partner in addressing this regional crisis. I’m confident they will continue to stop, deny and impede the caravan,” Morgan tweeted.

Appreciate the Government of Mexico’s commitment to enforcing safe, orderly and lawful migration. Mexico continues to be a true partner in addressing this regional crisis. I’m confident they will continue to stop, deny and impede the caravan. pic.twitter.com/998fFOx1ha — Acting Commissioner Mark Morgan (@CBPMarkMorgan) January 21, 2020

A large group of an estimated 4,000 people, referred to as the caravan, attempted to pass from Guatemala into Mexico on Monday. Video taken by reporters traveling with the group showed a chaotic and violent encounter between some in the group and the Mexican military. One reporter on the scene said the caravan members had submitted a petition at an official crossing point requesting the ability to pass through despite not intending to seek asylum in Mexico. Mexico’s National Institute of Migration issued a release denying the request. Some in the group responded by trying to cross illegally through the river and into Mexico.

Hundreds of mostly Honduran migrants travelling in a caravan to the U.S. try to enter Mexico by crossing the Suichate River that divides the country from Guatemala 📷: @johanordonez, Isaac Guzman/@AFP pic.twitter.com/2plVfjHGfX — Getty Images News (@GettyImagesNews) January 20, 2020

Mexican Foreign Minister Marcelo Ebrard said approximately 1,000 people did cross, Reuters reported. Mexico’s INM said 500 got through. Mexican National Guard sprayed tear gas at people as they went through the river and came up on the banks. The military and migrants threw rocks at one another, though the guards had plastic shields to protect themselves.

Mis compañeros de video de @Pajaropolitico han agarrado mi mal grabado material y han sido capaces de montar esta pieza. #CaravanaMigrante2020 https://t.co/AvGavReZrZ — Alberto Pradilla (@albertopradilla) January 20, 2020

The Mexican immigration office said on Wednesday it had taken into custody more than 2,000 people who entered its two southern border states of Chiapas and Tabasco without permission and began flying hundreds back to Honduras, where most of the caravan is from, though it is not clear if all of those returned crossed during the Monday melee.

Wolf insisted those who were able to evade Mexican authorities would not be admitted into the United States but returned home instead.