CLOSE

Attorney General Mark Brnovich. (Photo: Thomas Hawthorne/The Republic)

The state's top prosecutor cannot go around suing whomever he wants, lawyers for the governor and Board of Regents argued to the Arizona Supreme Court on Thursday in the culmination of a years-long legal battle over the power of the Attorney General's Office.

The court's decision could redefine the role of the attorney general in Arizona politics.

The argument stems from a lawsuit Attorney General Mark Brnovich filed in 2017 against the Board of Regents, charging that its tuition increases violate the state Constitution's provision requiring that the state universities be as close to free as possible.

Lower courts tossed out the case after the Board of Regents argued that the attorney general could not bring the lawsuit on his own whim.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

While the attorney general is the state's top criminal prosecutor and represents the state as its lawyer in civil cases, the Board of Regents argued he can only launch into legal action on behalf of the state in specific circumstances. They pointed to a 1960 Arizona Supreme Court decision in which justices said there are instances in which the attorney general can file lawsuits on behalf of the state but that these instances are based on specific laws.

For example, state law says the attorney general can file suit against other parts of Arizona government to recoup misused funds.

Arguments over role of office

The Attorney General's Office has sought to cast the legal battle as an effort to hold the Board of Regents accountable. Others in Arizona government view it as having much broader implications, with the prospect of allowing the attorney general to serve not only as the state's own lawyer but as their adversary, too.

"He is not the state. He is the officer of the state and he is empowered to act only when the Legislature gives that authority," argued Dominic Draye, a lawyer representing the Office of the Governor, which joined the proceedings to argue for the Board of Regents.

The secretary of state, superintendent of public instruction, treasurer and the Greater Phoenix Chamber of Commerce, among other groups, filed amicus briefs with the Supreme Court raising concerns about the attorney general's position.

Meanwhile, the Attorney General's Office — supported by several previous attorneys general — countered that state law gives Brnovich the broad power to prosecute cases.

"It gives the attorney general authority to come to court on behalf of the public interest," argued Beau Roysden, a lawyer representing the Attorney General's Office.

Justice Andrew Gould noted that the Legislature has written more than 100 different statutes outlining instances in which the attorney general can take legal action on behalf of the state and questioned why lawmakers would have created these laws if the attorney general already has power to file lawsuits as he sees fit.

The Attorney General's Office argued that its case against the universities falls under the law that allows it to pursue cases against other parts of government to recoup misused funds. The office contends that schools are not abiding by a state law that requires charging out-of-state tuition to undocumented students regardless of whether they have lived in Arizona.

Most of the Supreme Court gathered in its chambers in Phoenix for the hearing Thursday but attorneys made their arguments remotely via video conferencing due to public health precautions. Justice Robert Brutinel had recused himself and Court of Appeals Judge Philip Espinosa sat in his place, watching the proceedings from Tucson.

The court took the arguments under advisement and a decision is likely in the coming months.

Contact Andrew Oxford at andrew.oxford@arizonarepublic.com or on Twitter at @andrewboxford.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/arizona/2020/04/16/arizona-attorney-general-asks-supreme-court-broad-power-sue/5149054002/