“With the amount of people arriving, this is very quickly escalating to the point we won’t be able to handle it,” said Capt. Jeffrey Breazeale, the Yuma County coordinator for the Salvation Army, which is running the shelter with the help of staff and volunteers from Catholic Community Services.

“It’s a southern border crisis, and we are seeking help from the federal government,” Mr. Breazeale said. “The only way we know how to do that is declare an emergency.”

A high-ranking border patrol official in Yuma said recently that officers there had been overwhelmed by an entirely new population of border crossers that the agency was not prepared to handle: families.

From the beginning of the fiscal year on Sept. 1 through March 31, Yuma experienced a 273 percent increase in the number of migrants apprehended in the area by the Border Patrol, to 24,194 from 6,487 who arrived during the same period the previous fiscal year. The number of unaccompanied children taken in by authorities, totaling 3,679, was 51 percent higher.

The Border Patrol has invested thousands of dollars on supplies — including feminine care products, diapers and baby formula — to help accommodate the influx of families. The Yuma office had been approved for overtime funding and additional agents, but none of it has been enough to handle the rising number of asylum seekers, said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the situation.

California, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas have all been scrambling to handle the surge in migrant arrivals, most of whom are coming through Mexico from Central America. The number of families has eclipsed the number that arrived during the last spike, which occurred during the Obama administration.

Despite the crush of the arrivals, authorities have not dropped migrants in the streets of Yuma. Mr. Nicholls said the city had not spent any of its own funds on the migrants, and had relied instead on donations from the community, for everything from coloring books to diapers.