Now that everything is over in the Democratic presidential race and everyone is falling in line behind Joe Biden, the new Democrat race is the one to take second place on the Biden ticket.

Biden said in the March debate that he would pick a woman as his running mate, which had led to plenty of speculation as to whom he’ll pick. Georgia’s gubernatorial loser Stacey Abrams has made it known that she would serve as VP if Biden picked her (Good Lord, I pray he doesn’t), and that’s after she downplayed the same talk last year.

It probably shouldn’t surprise you who else has made her willingness known: Elizabeth Warren.

Maddow: If [Joe Biden] asked you to be his running mate, would you say yes?

Warren: Yes. pic.twitter.com/02qruQf2YH — Maddow Blog (@MaddowBlog) April 16, 2020

Experts say that a Warren pick could shore up Biden’s support with progressives. Even Biden’s chief rival, Bernie Sanders, believes that a progressive pick for Vice President will help Biden’s left-wing credibility.

“All I can say is that I think the more progressive the vice presidential candidate that he nominated, the better it would be in terms of the kind of response that our supporters would provide him,” Sanders said.

However, not all left-wingers are convinced that Warren is a good choice. Politico reports that many Sanders acolytes are still sore over how things went between Sanders and Warren earlier in the primary season.

“You’re not going to see a lot of groups who endorsed Bernie pushing for [Warren] given how things ended,” said one leader of a group that backed Sanders. The person privately believes “Warren would probably be the person who would win over the most progressives,” but said the organization would likely stay mum given the raw feelings.

A former aide to Sanders’ 2020 campaign added, “Elizabeth Warren has a progressive voting record and progressive ideas and has been a progressive leader. But if the goal is to bring disaffected Democrats into the fold, I think the primary and how that played out complicates her ability to do that.”

And of course, the question remains: would picking Warren leave the Democratic ticket too lily-white for some progressives? There’s plenty of push for Biden to pick a “woman of color” for the second spot on his ticket.

Regardless of what happens, you know that you’re going to hear plenty from Biden’s pick from now until the end of the race. I don’t think I can stomach listening to Warren or Abrams incessantly for the next six months.

All eyes are on Biden now as he deliberates his choice. It’s fascinating that the race for second spot on the ticket has generated this much interest. Stay tuned, and we’ll weigh in as soon as Biden’s pick becomes known.