Instacart, DoorDash, and Postmates have announced new policies to help their gig workers with potential financial burdens they might incur if they have to miss work due to the ongoing spread of the novel coronavirus.

Any of Instacart’s part-time employees or full-service shoppers diagnosed with COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus, or put in mandatory quarantine will now be able to receive up to 14 days of pay, according to Instacart. That brings the company in line with Uber and Lyft, which will similarly be compensating drivers for up to two weeks of pay if they are affected by the novel coronavirus. However, it’s worth noting this policy will only be available for 30 days from March 9th, according to Instacart’s blog.

Instacart is also letting all of its in-store shoppers nationally accrue sick pay, and that includes part-time employees. This benefit was previously only available to shoppers in select markets. Instacart shoppers can earn one hour of sick pay for every 30 hours worked, up to a maximum of 40 hours per year. Sick pay accrual will be backdated to the start of this year.

Instacart is also letting all of its in-store shoppers accrue sick pay

DoorDash will provide “up to two weeks of assistance to Dashers and Caviar couriers who are diagnosed with COVID-19 or who are subject to quarantine at the direction of public health officials,” the company said in a statement to The Verge. “The program will be available globally in all of the markets we serve in the United States, Canada, and Australia.”

Postmates is launching a fund that delivery workers in more than 22 states will be able to use to pay back the costs of COVID-19-related medical expenses, the company announced today. Grubhub hasn’t replied to a request for comment asking if it plans to pay workers who have to miss work due to the novel coronavirus outbreak.

On Friday, Instacart also rolled out a new “Leave at My Door Delivery” option across North America. Before Friday, it was in testing, and the company said it had seen a “significant surge in usage of this feature over the last few weeks,” which is why it decided to roll the feature out nationally. Postmates also rolled out a similar feature on Friday.

DoorDash lets you enter instructions to have orders left at your door, and said it is “testing enhanced drop-off options for contactless delivery to be rolled out shortly,” in a statement to The Verge. Grubhub also lets you enter delivery instructions when you place an order.

Update March 10th, 3:34PM ET: Added context from GrubHub.