Facebook has been shutting down traffic to conservative websites since the 2016 election.

Conservatives dominated social media in 2016 where they were able to get the truth uncensored. Facebook ended that in 2017 and 2018.

The Gateway Pundit spoke with two of the top conservative publishers in America.

Floyd Brown is a conservative author, speaker and media commentator. In 2008 Floyd launched Western Journal which quickly became one of the top conservative websites in America. By 2016 Floyd’s organization of Western Journal and other conservative websites under his umbrella had more than a billion page views. Since 2016 Floyd’s organization lost 75% of its Facebook traffic.

TRENDING: THE END OF AN ERA: Drudge Goes Full Leftie - Loses President Trump-- Go to Pro-Trump News Instead

Likewise, we spoke with Jared Vallorani from Klicked Media. Jared traveled to Washington DC with The Gateway Pundit and website owners at 100%FedUp in June to discuss Facebook targeting against conservative publishers with Republican lawmakers. Jared told The Gateway Pundit his organization Klicked Media, which hosts over 60 conservative websites, lost 400 million page views from Facebook in the last six months if you compare the traffic to a year ago. Jared said, “We lost 70% to 80% of our traffic if you compare January to May 2017 vs Jan to May 2018.”

If you combine the total number of page-views lost by just these two conservative online publishers you are looking at a loss of over 1.5 billion page-views from Facebook in one year.



These are numbers from just two of the top conservative publishers in America. This does not include the thousands of other conservative publishers across the country who lost all of their traffic coming from Facebook. Here at The Gateway Pundit our Facebook traffic has been effectively eliminated after we were ranked as the 4th most influential conservative publisher in the 2016 election.

The fact that Facebook is targeting conservative publishers should not be a surprise to Gateway Pundit readers.

We have been reporting on this for several months now. In July we released a study where we looked at several top conservative websites and discovered that the publishers had lost an average of 93% of their Facebook traffic.

This is a bloodbath. Facebook has wiped out conservative content to American subscribers.

This influence map below by Columbia Journalism Review shows the top influencers during the 2016 election.

And here is that same map showing the conservative publishers who have been targeted by Facebook since 2017.

Facebook has eliminated content from a vast majority of top conservative publishers since 2017.

On Wednesday James O”Keefe and Project Veritas published proof from a whistle-blower that Facebook plotted and planned to remove conservative content from their platform.

The information describes how Facebook engineers planned and went about policing political speech.

BREAKING: Facebook Insider Leaks Docs; Explains "Deboosting," "Troll Report," & Political Targeting in Video Interview (FULL –> https://t.co/UdR4D6OkaK) pic.twitter.com/1lQlpvq8sT — James O'Keefe (@JamesOKeefeIII) February 27, 2019

In 2016 suburban voters and women would check their Facebook pages and get conservative news. That is no longer the case.

Facebook has wiped out conservative publishers. Americans will no longer see articles from conservative websites even if you follow them.

Facebook took advertising dollars from all of these businesses and then targeted them after the 2016 election.

Facebook wants to pretend this was not a political decision. Yet, several top liberal activist groups: Media Matters, Share Blue, CREW and American Bridge, made it a priority in early 2017 to work with the liberal tech giants to undermine President Trump and ensure that liberals gain control of Congress and the presidency in 2020.

The tech giants did just that.