SALT LAKE CITY — It’s easy to feel like the news is full of doom and gloom these days. But while life is uncertain, difficult times inspire people to step up and help each other.

KSL.com’s new Uplifting Utah column showcases the good done by those around you. If you have a feel-good, local story, we’d love to hear about it! Email us the social media post or a description of the story in 200 words or less to web@ksl.com with the subject line “Uplifting Utah.”

For now, here are four uplifting stories that will brighten your day:

Policeman helps a local restaurant after customer doesn't pay

From West Valley City Police Department:

"WE’RE IN THIS TOGETHER: We all know it’s a tough time for restaurants right now and the family owners of Sumo Steak and Sushi here in WVC reached out to us after someone pulled a stunt that made things even worse.

“The owners explained that someone called and ordered about $100 worth of food, but didn’t come to pick it up. When the manager called them to remind them, they blocked the restaurant’s number.

“Not knowing what they could do about it, they explained, 'I called in to WVCPD non-emergency and got to speak with Officer Christiansen. He was unable to reach them and explained there wasn’t much we could do other than start a civil case (which would NOT be worth a $100 tab). But shortly after the call, Officer Christiansen came in and picked up their order (and would not let us donate it for free.) I don’t think he knows how grateful we are for this support and care during these times. As a local small restaurant we are struggling right now, and he alone helped us with about 1/2 of my daily money coming in right now. This will help us with our bills for the month that we are struggling to pay due to current situation. THANK YOU ❤️'

“We happen to know that after Officer Christiansen paid for that food, he dropped it off to share with other officers on duty. In this time when we are so focused on isolating ourselves from others, it’s even more crucial to remember to help others where we can! Thank you, Officer Christiansen for showing how we do it in WVC!"

Teachers hold parades for students by driving through their neighborhoods

Utah teachers connect with students through neighborhood parades Schools across Utah have been reaching out to their students through teacher parades during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Family comes from far away to wave to grandparents

Marriott hotel shows some love to Salt Lake City

The @Marriott in downtown #SLC is showing the city some love tonight!



To all of the hospitality staff here & around the globe, know that we appreciate you and we will definitely need a vacation after all of this is over; so stay strong! #WeAreInThisTogetherpic.twitter.com/1AZjBNzKbw — Nichole Carter (@Carters_Harder) March 30, 2020

KSL.com’s Uplifting Utah column features feel-good stories sent in from people outside the newsroom. To share the stories that have made your day better, email them in 200 words or less to web@ksl.com. Photos and videos are encouraged. Stories may be edited for length and clarity.