Sizing up the 2020 NFL draft by separate positions is a tough task in its own right, as a clear pecking order is absent in several spots. Ranking players all together, then, is sure to ignite some debate.

But to embrace the discord, USA TODAY Sports broke down the top 50 players available this year regardless of the position. The process of ranking prospects by value rather than expected draft position will spark some disagreements, but it's the same undertaking NFL teams face as they prepare for this year's event, which begins next Thursday.

1. Chase Young, DE, Ohio State: College football's most dominant force is about to become the NFL's problem — except for the team that drafts him. Young was nearly unblockable in one-on-one scenarios, and his unique blend of size, speed and power positions him as a defensive cornerstone for years to come. Even scarier: Young still has room to grow, as diversifying his set of pass-rush moves will leave opponents with even fewer avenues for neutralizing him.

2. Joe Burrow, QB, LSU: Accuracy and poise are perhaps two of the most important attributes for any quarterback, and Burrow is a phenom in both of those respects. While his sheer arm strength doesn't measure up to the best of the NFL, it doesn't look like there's much he can't do at a very high level at this point.

3. Tua Tagovailoa, QB, Alabama: This placement isn't solely about the hip surgery, as Burrow did render the "Tank for Tua" talk moot by surpassing the Crimson Tide signal-caller as a prospect. Still, the injury and its potential long-term ramifications are the only things that would significantly muddy the outlook for Tagovailoa, a dynamic offensive engine who can scan the field easily and slice up defenses with remarkable accuracy.

4. Jeff Okudah, CB, Ohio State: Hard to imagine a more complete cornerback coming out of college. No matter the scheme or situation, Okudah is the rare player who can shadow No. 1 receivers thanks to his top-notch quickness, recovery speed, physicality and mental processing.

CORONAVIRUS & SPORTS: Get the latest news and information right in your inbox. Sign up here.

FAMILY TIES:NFL draft features plenty of prospects whose fathers were standouts in league

5. Jerry Jeudy, WR, Alabama: If it were possible for an undergrad receiver to obtain a master's degree in the art of catching passes, Jeudy would already have one. His unassuming build aside, the 6-1, 193-pound target is nearly the complete package, his penchant for creating separation and cutting on a dime ranking his top qualities.

6. Jedrick Wills Jr., OT, Alabama: Beating Wills and making a play in the backfield was a nearly impossible task for college defenders, who were frequently jolted out of the way as soon as the powerful right tackle laid hands on them. A surprisingly fluid mover for his size, Wills can still be one of the league's better pass blockers even if he doesn't move to the left side.

7. Isaiah Simmons, LB/S, Clemson: Versatile doesn't seem like a sufficient descriptor for a defender who lined up nearly everywhere on the field and somehow never looked out of place. Outstanding in coverage and as a blitzer, Simmons will keep opponents off balance given his multifaceted athleticism and skill set.

8. CeeDee Lamb, WR, Oklahoma: Like Jeudy, Lamb is a well-rounded receiver who can ignite big gains from nearly any spot on the field. He's particularly adept at knifing through defenses after the catch and plucking passes from high in the air, skills that will become even more apparent when he advances his understanding of how to break free from defensive backs.

9. Henry Ruggs III, WR, Alabama: The 25 touchdowns on 100 career touches teased Ruggs' untapped potential, and the 4.27-second 40-yard dash at the combine — somehow disappointing by his own standard — reinforced it. More than just a speed merchant, Ruggs attacks the ball in traffic and isn't afraid to go over the middle.

10. Andrew Thomas, OT, Georgia: A bulldozer in the run game and a capable pass protector, Thomas can bring a sense of reliability to nearly any offensive line. Becoming an anchor at left tackle will depend on a more disciplined approach.

11. C.J. Henderson, CB, Florida: By nearly every measure, Henderson is an ace cover man, capable of staying glued to receivers downfield and making a play on any ball thrown his way. The looming question is how his play slipped last season and whether he's at risk of more letdowns against more physical NFL pass catchers.

12. Derrick Brown, DT, Auburn: Returning for his senior season paid off, as the 6-5, 326-pound Southeastern Conference defensive player of the year proved nearly impossible to hold at the point of attack. No one will mistake him for Aaron Donald, but he can still disrupt passing games by engineering pressure on the interior even if he doesn't log gaudy sack numbers.

13. Javon Kinlaw, DT, South Carolina: From his rapid first step, Kinlaw overwhelms linemen by either surging into the backfield from the get-go or knocking them back once he engages them. Technical improvements, particularly in his leverage and hand usage, will be key to his success in the pros.

14. Mekhi Becton, OT, Louisville: The 6-7, 364-pound blocker, who will trail only Raiders offensive tackle Trent Brown as the second-heaviest player in the NFL, is almost without peer when it comes to his physical makeup. Additional work on his balance could make Becton a formidable blindside blocker capable of throwing people out of his way.

15. Patrick Queen, LB, LSU: Here's the new prototype for off-ball linebackers, as Queen utilizes sublime speed for the position by shooting into the backfield to create havoc or sticking with opponents in coverage.

16. Tristan Wirfs, OT, Iowa: His work as a wrestler and in the weight room are evident in his play, which frequently featured opponents being driven out of the way when he locked in. Rangy pass rushers could fluster him on the edge, but he can also be a standout starter if moved to guard.

17. Grant Delpit, S, LSU: Even though tackling troubles could cost him a spot in the first round, Delpit is built to frustrate modern passing attacks with his ball-hawking tendencies and prompt recognition.

18. Justin Herbert, QB, Oregon: From a physical standpoint, Herbert checks nearly every box for the desired attributes of a quarterback thanks to his 6-6 frame, outstanding arm strength and impressive mobility. His discomfort against pressure and erratic ball placement, however, leave unease about how he'll settle in when handed the reins to an NFL offense.

19. Josh Jones, OT, Houston: The former basketball standout is a fluid mover at 6-5 and 319 pounds, portending a promising future as a fixture at left tackle if he can become a more refined blocker.

20. Trevon Diggs, CB, Alabama: Smothering receivers at the line of scrimmage is second-nature to the brother of Bills wide receiver Stefon Diggs, though he might need to be placed in a scheme that emphasizes his length and playmaking ability and obscures his change-of-direction shortcomings.

21. Justin Jefferson, WR, LSU: Between his know-how as a route-runner and competitiveness in hauling in contested catches, Jefferson offers traits that will make him a trusted target for almost any quarterback.

22. K'Lavon Chaisson, DE/OLB, LSU: Combining his bend and burst with an impressive bull rush, Chaisson offers plenty as an ascendant edge rusher, albeit one who still has a ways to go in his development.

23. Laviska Shenault Jr., WR, Colorado: A bully with the ball in his hands, Shenault still has work to do as a route runner to threaten defenses down the field instead of merely at the line of scrimmage.

24. Jeff Gladney, CB, TCU: Playing with the physical approach of a much bigger defender, Gladney doesn't relent from his pesky style, though an additional degree of restraint might be required at the next level given his proclivity to get too grabby with opponents.

25. Zack Baun, LB, Wisconsin: While lacking the desired size for an edge rusher, Baun can become a mainstay in opponents' backfields by exploding upfield and employing his impressive finishing touch.

26. D'Andre Swift, RB, Georgia: Instinctive and evasive both as a runner and receiver, Swift is a three-down threat who poses a serious problem for any defender trying to bring him down in the open field.

27. Ashtyn Davis, S, California: A December groin surgery might push Davis down some draft boards, but he has unmatched range among this year's safety class thanks to his elite speed, quickness and ball skills.

28. Brandon Aiyuk, WR, Arizona State: Staying on top of him is an extreme challenge for almost any defensive back, as Aiyuk eats up cushions in a hurry and can break into the open field with ease.

29. Denzel Mims, WR, Baylor: At 6-3 and 207 pounds with 4.38-second speed in the 40-yard dash and a knack for hauling in circus catches, Mims has the makings of a No. 1 receiver — if he can polish his route-running and cut down on drops.

30. Xavier McKinney, S, Alabama: Do-it-all defenders are in demand, and McKinney's comfort in taking on a range of assignments in coverage and against the run make him a valuable piece.

31. Jaylon Johnson, CB, Utah: Physical to a fault, Johnson concedes nothing to receivers at the line of scrimmage and can be a vexing presence in a man-heavy secondary, so long as he exhibits better discipline.

32. Michael Pittman, WR, USC: Though not as dynamic as some of his pass-catching peers, the 6-4, 223-pound Pittman projects as a reliable target who can thrive working the underneath and intermediate areas of the field.

33. Kristian Fulton, CB, LSU: Already a veteran of press coverage who has been battle-tested against a rash of top-notch receivers, Fulton stays collected in his assignments despite recovery speed issues that could pose a bigger problem at the next level.

34. A.J. Epenesa, DE, Iowa: Somewhat of an anachronism as an oversized edge rusher, Epenesa still can somewhat compensate for his subpar burst with power, length and fluidity, giving him a relatively high floor.

35. KJ Hamler, WR, Penn State: Soon to be among the NFL's slight receivers at 5-9 and 178 pounds, Hamler will make his mark as a deep-threat dynamo and slot target who can rack up yards after the catch, so long as he's not beset by the drops that plagued his college career.

36. Clyde Edwards-Helaire, RB, LSU: His 5-7, 207-pound frame and so-so long speed shouldn't be of concern, as Edwards-Helaire wins by juking past defenders and creating favorable matchups in the passing game.

37. Jalen Reagor, WR, TCU: If he gets a clean release, watch out. Reagor not only can fly downfield and take quick strikes for big gains, he also attacks jump balls with ferocity, though his lapses in focus could prove costly.

38. A.J. Terrell, CB, Clemson: Don't allow his letdown performance in the title game to color opinions of his ability too much, as Terrell has the length and ball skills that teams covet from a disruptive cornerback.

39. Kenneth Murray, LB, Oklahoma: More of a run-and-chase linebacker than an accomplished player in coverage, Murray is going to have to add new skills to his tool kit to become a highly valued defender.

40. Yetur Matos-Gross, DE, Penn State: Able to work back inside more comfortably than many other college pass rushers, Matos-Gross now must show he can create pressure with consistency after a hit-or-miss career with the Nittany Lions.

41. Jordan Love, QB, Utah State: If he can dial back the devil-may-care playing style and tendency to force throws late, Love sizes up as an intriguing option for a team looking to harness his electric playmaking potential.

42. Cesar Ruiz, C, Michigan: More steady than overpowering, Ruiz is the kind of dependable player who can carve out a long career by keeping his teammates out of harm's way.

43. Terrell Lewis, DE/OLB, Alabama: His injury history is concerning after missing nearly two full years, but Lewis' length and explosiveness are imposing.

44. Ross Blacklock, DT, TCU: A tornado on the interior, Blacklock is at times an all-or-nothing player who will either set a play off course or be washed out when a blocker locks onto him.

45. Antoine Winfield Jr., S, Minnesota: Size and injury history aside, the son of the former Vikings great handles all the important tasks for a safety by diagnosing plays from up high and rallying to the ball.

46. Tee Higgins, WR, Clemson: Deep speed questions have hounded him since he sat out the 40-yard dash at the combine, but he shouldn't have trouble establishing himself as a jump-ball and red-zone weapon.

47. Jonathan Taylor, RB, Wisconsin: His body of work is that of a bell-cow back who possesses the speed to break off long gains, leaving the biggest questions about his ball-security issues and uneven pass-catching efforts.

48. Jordan Elliott, DT, Missouri: In a class rife with promising Day 2 defensive tackle prospects, Elliott is an attractive option, with the ability to be both slippery and powerful when taking on linemen.

49. J.K. Dobbins, RB, Ohio State: As Dobbins' career continued, his patient, well-rounded running style became easier to appreciate.

50. Terrell Burgess, S, Utah: Man coverage skills are his calling card, and there's no shortage of teams who would benefit from someone who can match up with receivers from the slot.

Follow Michael Middlehurst-Schwartz on Twitter @MikeMSchwartz.

If you love talking football, we have the perfect spot for you. Join our Facebook Group, The Ruling Off the Field, to engage in friendly debate and conversation with fellow football fans and our NFL insiders. Do the right thing, sign up now!