To keep our community informed of the most urgent coronavirus news, The San Francisco Chronicle’s critical updates are free to read. Ongoing coverage is available to subscribers. Subscribe now for full access and to support our work.

Total coronavirus cases:

• 1,887 in California, including 798 in the Bay Area.

• 35,530 cases in the U.S., with 473 deaths: 35 in California, 153 in New York, 95 in Washington state, 25 in Georgia, 21 in New Jersey, 20 in Louisiana, 13 in Florida, 10 in Michigan, 9 in Illinois, 8 in Texas and Connecticut, 7 each in Colorado and Indiana, 6 in Virginia, 5 in Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and Oregon, 4 in Wisconsin, 3 each in Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri, Ohio and South Carolina, 2 each in Arizona, the District of Columbia, Kansas, Nevada, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Vermont, and one each in Minnesota, Mississippi, South Dakota and Utah.

• More than 354,000 in the world and more than 15,400 deaths. More than 100,000 people have recovered.

For a detailed map, check out The Chronicle’s Coronavirus Tracker.

To get regular updates on our coverage, sign up for our coronavirus newsletter.

For more information about the shelter-in-place orders across most of the Bay Area, read this story.

Developments from March 24:

11:50 p.m. Stanford reports one on-campus case, 24 in ‘broad community’: Stanford officials are aware of one positive COVID-19 case among students currently living on campus, according to an update from Associate Vice Provost Russell Furr. Officials are aware of 24 total confirmed cases involving people connected to Stanford as faculty, staff, students or postdocs, the update states. That number includes people tested at Stanford and people who were tested elsewhere and self-reported results to the university. The student living on campus who tested positive is self-isolating on campus. The others are being advised to self-isolate and seek out medical care. Officials noted the case count may not be comprehensive as it is based partly on self-reporting.

11:25 p.m. McConnell calls stimulus bill a ‘war-time level of investment’: Speaking on the Senate floor, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said late Tuesday night of a $2 trillion stimulus package to jolt the U.S. economy amid the coronavirus pandemic: “In effect, this is a war-time level of investment into our nation.” The package would reportedly send money to citizens, businesses and states affected by the pandemic. Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer called it the “largest rescue package in American history.” Schumer, also speaking on the Senate floor, said: “This is not a moment of celebration but one of necessity.” McConnell said: “It will rush new resources onto the front lines of our nation’s health care fight. And it will inject trillions of dollars of cash into the economy as fast as possible to help American workers, families, small businesses and industries make it through this disruption and emerge on the other side ready to soar.”

10:23 p.m. White House and Senate reach deal on $2 trillion emergency stimulus package: The Trump Administration and Senate reached a deal on a massive stimulus package meant to pour money into an economy battered by the coronavirus, The Washington Post reported. According to the Post, the legislation would provide $1,200 checks to many Americans, set aside $500 billion for cities, states and industries, and devote $367 billion for loans to small businesses. Congress will speed the bill through both houses without formal hearings, the report says.

10:15 p.m. Immigrants detained by ICE file lawsuit, demand release: Thirteen immigrants detained by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement at two California facilities — including Yuba County Jail in Marysville — filed a lawsuit in federal district court Tuesday demanding to be released because they say their health conditions make them vulnerable to dying if they get infected with the coronavirus.

10:13 p.m. Tech conference producer shuts down business: O'Reilly Media said it would no longer produce in-person events, and would shut down that part of its business. The Sebastopol company, whose chairman, Tim O'Reilly, is a widely respected internet expert, is best known for the Web 2.0 Summit events that highlighted a second wave of online companies that came after the dot-com boom. CEO Laura Baldwin said the coronavirus had a "material impact" on its business and might permanently change demand for live events.

10:05 p.m. More than one-third of Alameda County cases in 20-44 age range: Alameda County public health officer Dr. Erica Pan said Tuesday that more than one-third of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the county are aged 20-44. Speaking at a Board of Supervisors meeting, Pan said most or none of those patients were hospitalized. Alameda County reported a total of 124 positive cases on Tuesday, not including those in City of Berkeley, which reported 11 positive cases. Pan said Alameda County is currently giving about 30 tests a day at its public health lab with priority on staff and residents of long-term care facilities, health-care personnel, quarantined contacts of confirmed cases and the critically ill.

9:30 p.m. SF sheriff’s deputy cadet tests positive: A deputy cadet who works security at City Hall has tested positive for coronavirus, sources say. In an email obtained by the Chronicle Tuesday night, Clerk of the Board of Supervisors Angela Calvillo sought to assure City Hall staff that they are at “low risk of contracting COVID-19 even if the individual who tested positive for the disease handled your bag.” A spokesperson for the SF Sheriff’s department did not immediately return a request for comment.

8:30 p.m. Marin County clarifies parks closure: Outdoor recreation areas including parks, open spaces and campgrounds in Marin County are closed to motorized access, but people can still access those areas by foot, bicycle or other non-motorized vehicle, county health officials clarified Tuesday. People with physical limitations or who live up steep hills can still access park facilities by motorized means “to the minimum extent necessary to engage in essential activities.” All visitors are told to follow social distancing requirements.

7:38 p.m. Los Angeles County amends report of youth death from COVID-19: Health officials in Los Angeles County issued a statement saying the death of a minor previously reported as being from COVID-19 “will require further evaluation” by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Earlier Tuesday, county health officials said a youth from Lancaster was among four new deaths in the county. Gov. Gavin Newsom cited the case in a briefing as evidence that: “Young people can and will be impacted by this virus.” The county’s statement later Tuesday, though, indicated cause of death could have been something else: “Though early tests indicated a positive result for COVID-10, the case is complex and there may be an alternate explanation for this fatality.”

7:30 p.m. NFL to close team facilities: The National Football League sent a memo to teams saying team facilities will be closed Wednesday for at least two weeks, with limited exceptions, according to ESPN reporter Adam Schefter. The league will determine April 8 whether to reopen the facilities with advice from medical experts and public health authorities. In a statement, NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell said the decision was made “to ensure that all clubs operate on a level playing field, and that the NFL continues to conduct itself in a responsible way at this time …” Employees providing medical treatment to players or working in security or maintaining teams’ IT networks can continue to work at team facilities. Teams can still sign players and otherwise conduct business remotely.

7:02 p.m. CDC report says that coronavirus stayed on cruise ship surfaces for 17 days: A report released Tuesday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that the coronavirus lingered for more than two weeks on the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan. Health officials found traces of the virus in cabins of infected passengers up to 17 days after the passengers left, the report says. The cabins in question had not yet been disinfected. The data could not determine whether transmission of the virus occurred from these contaminated surfaces, but it suggests that further study of infection on cruise ships is warranted, the report says. The Diamond Princess carried 3,711 passengers and crew members before arriving in Yokohama, Japan in January. Of that total, 712 tested positive for COVID-19.

6:48 p.m. Bay Area ferry agency asks Newsom for $4 million: Although the San Francisco Bay Area Water Emergency Transportation Authority cut service during the coronavirus pandemic, officials hope to keep enough captains, deckhands, engineers and other staff on hand to operate the fleet in an emergency. So WETA has joined the chorus of transit agencies asking Gov. Gavin Newsom for emergency stimulus funding. In a letter to the Newsom, Board of Directors Chair Jim Wunderman cited WETA's mission to provide a reliable transbay crossing if other agencies are decimated by, say, an earthquake in the midst of the pandemic. WETA has lost an estimated $8 million in fares as commuters shelter at home, but officials identified $4 million in fuel savings and surplus revenue from strong passenger counts early in the year.

6:42 p.m. Hospital ship USNS Mercy en route to Los Angeles: The hospital ship USNS Mercy is scheduled to arrive at the Port of Los Angeles this weekend to aid in coronavirus response, Gov. Gavin Newsom said in a Tuesday briefing. The ship is departing from Naval Station San Diego carrying more than 800 Navy medical personnel and support staff, the U.S. Navy reported. It will serve as a “referral hospital” to treat non-COVID-19 patients and allow local hospitals to focus on COVID-19 cases. Newsom said the ship could arrive in Los Angeles as early as Friday.

6:40 p.m. Gulfs emerge between Newsom, Trump: Newsom said he is operating not just on a different timeline from President Trump when it comes to the outbreak, but on an entirely “different playing field.” In contrast to the president has made it clear he doesn’t see the crisis resolving anytime soon. Click here for the full story.

6:28 p.m. Newsom signs order halting intake at state prisons: Gov. Gavin Newsom has issued an executive order to temporarily halt intake and transfer of inmates at the state’s 35 prisons and youth at the state’s four youth correctional facilities. Intake is halted for the next 30 days, during which inmates and youth will remain in county custody. The time frame can be extended if needed. The order also directs the Board of Parole Hearings to hold parole hearings by video conference starting no later than April 13 and for the next 60 days. As of Monday, there were five confirmed cases of COVID-19 among CDCR staff and one confirmed case of an inmate in the state’s prison system.

6:03 p.m. Newsom appeals to young Californians after death of minor: Gov. Gavin Newsom expressed sympathy to the family and community of a minor from Lancaster (Los Angeles County) who died after contracting COVID-19. “Young people can and will be impacted by this virus,” he said. In a press briefing, Newsom said nearly 50% of positive cases in California were in patients age 18-to-49, though the hospitalization rate is skewed toward older patients. “I just cannot impress upon the young people out there more the seriousness of this moment and how critical they are to ultimately getting us on the other side by practicing that social distancing that we are all accustomed to hearing but not in every case advancing individually,” Newsom said.

5:55 p.m. Newsom says California unlikely to reopen by early April: Gov. Gavin Newsom said in a briefing Tuesday that it would be “misleading” to think California can re-open businesses and resume operating normally by early April. Earlier Tuesday, President Donald Trump stated a hope for much of the country to re-open by Easter, which falls on April 12. “We’re trying to bend that curve,” Newsom said, referencing the increase of COVID-19 cases in California, “but we haven’t bent it.” Newsom said the next 6-to-8 weeks “will be pivotal and determinative in terms of being able to make adjustments and being able to sort of reset expectations. … But I think April, for California, would be sooner than any of the experts that I’ve talked to would believe is possible.”

5:50 p.m. Bay Area transit agencies instructing passengers to board buses through the rear: AC Transit instructed passengers to start boarding buses through the rear doors this week, a move to protect bus drivers as coronavirus spreads. A bus parked at El Cerrito Plaza BART Station on Monday even had caution tape across the middle to keep passengers in the back end, though the bus was empty. SamTrans will adopt the practice Wednesday. Both agencies have stopped charging bus fare until further notice. Muni, which always allows rear-door boarding, has not changed its policy during the pandemic, though one driver on the 45-Union/Stockton asked passengers to enter through the back doors on Monday. The San Francisco agency has switched its entire bus fleet to vehicles with protective cabs for operators.

5:40 p.m. San Francisco announces first coronavirus-related death: The patient, identified only as a man in his 40s, had “multiple, significant underlying health conditions,” San Francisco officials announced in a Tuesday statement. “My condolences go out to this San Franciscan and their loved ones. It is a sad day, and we need to pull together as a city to do everything in our power to reduce the likelihood of additional deaths in our community,” San Francisco Mayor London Breed said.

5:32 p.m. Ford joins effort to make respirators, ventilators: Ford said Tuesday it’s working with 3M and GE Healthcare to manufacture medical and protective equipment for first responders, health care workers and patients in the COVID-19 pandemic. Ford said it is working with 3M to increase production of powered air-purifying respirators and with GE to expand production of a version of a GE ventilator for patients with respiratory problems. Ford said it also plans to assemble more than 100,000 face shields per week and produce other components for use in personal protective equipment using its 3D printing capabilities.

Now Playing:

5:30 p.m. California officials deliver thousands of masks in Napa County: The state’s Office of Emergency Services delivered 4,200 N95 masks, 1,000 face shields and 5,500 surgical masks to Queen of The Valley Hospital in Napa and the Napa County Emergency Operations Center, according to Gov. Gavin Newsom.

4:55 p.m. Why California has far fewer cases than New York: Early action to slow the coronavirus in the Bay Area and California may have helped the state avoid the dramatic impact that is now being seen in New York, experts say. But New York is also testing more people, and California may not be far behind. Read the story here.

4:40 p.m. Third staff member at Laguna Honda Hospital tests positive: Three employees at San Francisco’s large public nursing home have tested positive for the new coronavirus, dramatically increasing the possibility of a wider outbreak in the 750-person facility. Two of the infected staff members are nurses, said Brent Andrew, a Department of Public Health spokesman. He said the third staff member had "no patient contact," but declined to be more specific on where they worked. An investigation is ongoing onto how many people the infected staff members have come in contact with.

4:30 p.m. Breed: “Why are we still listening to the President?”: San Francisco Mayor London Breed responded sharply to President Trump’s goal of re-opening business in the U.S. by Easter during an appearance on ABC7 News on Tuesday. Asked about Trump pushing for operations in the U.S. to restart by April 12, Breed said: “My response is, why are we still listening to the President? I mean, the fact is we here in our city, throughout states in the United States of America, we have demonstrated sadly that we’ve had to jump into action and make this work without federal government support. I mean, even here in San Francisco, we’ve had private companies go out and get masks and (personal protective equipment) in general to support our health-care workers. We’ve had to basically be innovative and work with the private sector to try and get the resources we need in order to make sure public health was protected. The federal government just isn’t moving fast enough. I know the Speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, is busting her butt in Congress to try and get us the package that we need that’s going to actually help workers and not necessarily corporations. But you know what? We don’t have time to waste. Lives are in jeopardy. I mean, look what happened in New York. San Francisco is at 152 cases as of today. So we don’t have time to mess around.”

4:05 p.m. City of Santa Clara police respond to more than two dozen calls about shelter-in-place: Over the last week, City of Santa Clara Police Department has responded to roughly 30 calls about alleged violations of the county’s shelter-in-place order, “such as people who are not household members playing basketball in parks,” according to the City of Santa Clara Communications/Emergency Operations Center. Police have responded to the reported violations “by educating the public and/or business owner about the 'Stay-at-Home' order,” officials said.

3:58 p.m. Nearly half of California's COVID-19 cases in 18-49 age range: According to the state’s public health department, California had confirmed 2,102 cases of COVID-19 as of 2 p.m. Monday. Of those, 970 cases, or 46.1 percent, were in patients age 18-49. There were 493 cases confirmed in patients age 50-64, 449 cases in patients 65 or older, 28 cases in patients age 0-17 and 162 cases in which the patient’s age was unknown, according to CDPH. As of 2 p.m. Monday, 51.4% of California’s confirmed cases were male patients, 40.1% were female patients and 8.5% were cases in which the patient’s gender was unknown. There had been 27,650 tests conducted in California with at least 15,554 results received and 12,100 results pending.

3:53 p.m. SF lawmakers call for AB5 enforcement: California's gig-work law doesn't automatically turn Uber and Lyft drivers into employees. It must be enforced — and some San Francisco supervisors are calling for the city to do that, which they say could give ride-hail and delivery drivers more protection against the coronavirus, Carolyn Said reports.

3:49 p.m. SF postpones City Hall weddings: San Francisco officials said Tuesday that all City Hall weddings would be postponed until April 30 because of the coronavirus. Anyone who already booked an appointment will get priority once appointments open up again. “We’re listening to couples planning their wedding ceremonies at City Hall, and we want to let them know we’ll be open to them once it’s safe to do so,” said Samantha Allen, Director of City Hall Events. “Couples who need a license only for an urgent need should call 3-1-1.”

3:48 p.m. SF supervisor wants extra protections for essential workers: “What it means to work at a grocery story is very different today from what it meant two weeks ago," says San Francisco Supervisor Matt Haney, who introduced a resolution Tuesday calling for more protections for workers in essential businesses. Read the story here.

3:40 p.m. Santa Clara County approves temporary moratorium on evictions: The Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors approved an ordinance to temporarily prohibit evictions amid the COVID-19 pandemic. The ordinance suspends evictions of residential and small-business tenants for non-payment of rent if the non-payment is a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The ordinance is scheduled to expire May 31 and includes a 120-day grace period for rent payments following its conclusion.

3:39 p.m. Famed playwright Terrance McNally dies of coronavirus: Playwright, librettist and screenwriter Terrence McNally, known for “Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune,” “Master Class,” “Love! Valour! Compassion!” and “Ragtime,” among many other works, died Tuesday, March 24, due to coronavirus complications at age 81. He had previously survived lung cancer and had a chronic pulmonary condition. Read the story here.

3:31 p.m. Federal officials suggest parts of U.S. less impacted by virus could open "quickly": President Trump said he thinks there are sections of the country with fewer cases of COVID-19 where social distancing guidelines could be eased sooner than places like New York, which has seen a surge in patients and deaths. “We can have large sections of the country open,” Trump said. “I think it’s very important that we ... start thinking about it. Our people want it to be open, they’re raring to go. I think it’s going to go very quickly.” Dr. Anthony Fauci, U.S. infectious disease expert, said health experts continue to evaluate data, especially in places with fewer cases, to see if that would be an option. “It’s a flexible situation,” he said.

3:29 p.m. More than 1,000 SFO, San Jose airline workers face layoffs: The plunge in air traffic, along with a potential domestic travel ban, is forcing mass layoffs of workers who could lose health insurance after exposure to higher health risks. Unions are negotiating for more compensation.

3:06 p.m. White House officials urge people fleeing New York City to self-isolate: Health officials instructed people who have fled New York City, the country's epicenter of the COVID-19 outbreak, in the past few days to self-isolate for 14 days after their departure in order to avoid spreading the virus to new communities. The New York City metro area accounts for 56% of the country’s cases and 60% of new cases, as well as 31% of the country’s deaths. One in 1,000 people is infected in that region. “It’s a very serious situation, they’ve suffered terribly,” said Dr. Anthony Fauci, an infectious disease expert with the National Institutes of Health.

3:05 p.m. White House coronavirus response coordinator says test numbers rising: Dr. Deborah Birx said at a White House briefing that 370,000 tests for COVID-19 have now been conducted in the U.S. That includes 220,000 tests in the last eight days. “We’re very proud of those numbers, but we know that we need to do more,” Birx said. The total number of cases in the U.S. has surpassed 50,000, with 593 deaths reported as of Tuesday afternoon.

2:58 p.m. Postal shipments "near Christmas levels": The U.S. Postal Service said its shipment volume is booming like it usually does in the e-commerce peak before the holidays, and it's hiring 1,000 postal workers in the Bay Area to cope with demand. See who's hiring amid the pandemic.

2:55 p.m. President Trump pushes for country to re-open by Easter: At an afternoon White House briefing, President Trump again pushed for the country to re-open business and normal operations by Easter (April 12). “Easter as our timeline, what a great timeline that would be,” Trump said. He said he continues to consult with health officials and will make a decision on the country's re-opening based on "hard facts and data" to support the health and safety of Americans. Although health officials and experts have said social distancing could be necessary for many months, Trump said there is “tremendous hope” and he is beginning to “see the light at the end of the tunnel.”

2:49 p.m. Some Bay Area bank branches close: Banks are allowed to stay open under shelter-in-place orders, but some are closing branches anyway, and paying bonuses to workers on the viral front lines. Chronicle columnist Kathleen Pender looks at how you'll get your money.

2:47 p.m. Four Contra Costa County firefighters test positive for COVID-19: Four firefighters in the Contra Costa County Fire Protection District have tested positive for the virus, spokesman Steve Hill said. Nine fire district personnel have tested negative and three are awaiting results, Hill said. The firefighters who tested positive are quarantined at home. Personnel who have tested negative or have tests pending are self-isolating at home. Hill said the county opened a testing station for first responders and health care workers Saturday. He also noted the fire district has more than 400 employees and is “confident” there has not been transmission of the virus through patient encounters because of personal-protective-equipment protocols.

2:45 p.m. Two Santa Rosa police officers test positive: Two officers in the Santa Rosa Police Department have tested positive for COVID-19, and a third is waiting for test results after developing flu-like symptoms, the department said. The two positive cases have received medical attention and are in stable condition. Other department employees who feel sick or believe they were exposed to the infected officers are in self-quarantine. “While the news of these cases is concerning, I want to reassure Santa Rosans that the police department will continue to answer calls for service and meet the needs of our community,” said Chief Rainer Navarro.

2:41 p.m. California distilleries turn alcohol into hand sanitizer: To help meet demand for hand sanitizer, spirits producers have begun making it themselves from the ethanol they've got on hand. Previously, they would have needed special permission for this, but newly relaxed regulations make it easier. Click here to read more.

2:34 p.m. Confirmed Bay Area cases top 1,000: With seven of the nine Bay Area counties having posted new data, the total number of confirmed cases rose to 1,014 on Tuesday afternoon. There were 128 new cases reported Tuesday, which is a 14.4% increase in total confirmed cases from Monday. Solano and Marin counties have not yet reported new data.

2:31 First ICE detainee tests positive in New Jersey, report says: A person detained by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement in a New Jersey facility has tested positive for COVID-19, according to a BuzzFeed report. The case is the first known person in ICE custody to contract the new virus. An officer at the same facility tested positive last week, the report said.

2:10 p.m. BART ridership collapses: BART officials said ridership remained low Monday, which marked the first day of temporary service reductions. Transit officials recorded a 91% drop compared to an average Monday from last month. Compared to March 16 before the shelter-in-place orders were issued across the Bay Area, 83,639 fewer riders took BART on Monday.

1:42 p.m. Bay Area’s low-income seniors struggle to access food during coronavirus: With the state’s orders that all seniors over age 65 stay at home, service providers are having to quickly figure out how to get food to the most vulnerable population as demand skyrockets. Read the full story.

1:34 p.m. SF workers express fears over handling cash: The coronavirus has workers at coffee shops and other businesses able to stay open afraid to take cash. San Francisco law doesn’t allow the businesses to refuse cash and the city isn’t backing down — even during the coronavirus pandemic. Read the full story.

1:33 p.m. SF police sergeant tests positive for COVID-19: San Francisco police say a sergeant has tested positive for COVID-19. The sergeant, who was assigned to the special victims unit at the Hall of Justice, went home Friday and informed a supervisor. “Upon being notified of the positive test result this morning, we immediately informed SVU staff and closed the office to organize deep cleaning services,” police said. The sergeant’s partner reported not feeling well and has self-quarantined. Officials said the partner has not gone into the office this week. Members of the same unit were divided into teams working from home and other locations. “We are saddened by the news that one of our colleagues has tested positive for COVID-19,” officials said. “Our work puts our sworn and non-sworn professional staff in close contact with the public every day. We remain committed to the health and well-being of both the public and our dedicated members.”

1:19 p.m. Los Angeles officials announce four new deaths, including first youth: Los Angeles County health officials announced four new deaths Tuesday, including a minor, as the tally of known confirmed COVID-19 cases grew to 662 and 11 deaths total. “The young person who died was a person from Lancaster,” Director Barbara Ferrer said at a news conference, adding that officials are still investigating the recent deaths.

1:17 p.m. Shelter-in-place order complicates moving homes: While the shelter-in-place orders do not strictly prohibit moving, San Francisco and other Bay Area residents described the difficulties of moving during a pandemic, including furniture delivery delays, canceled moving van permits and social distancing while hauling boxes.

1:05 p.m. Dow up 11%: The stock markets rallied Tuesday, as investors turned optimistic about the prospects of Congress passing a stimulus to counter the economic effects of the coronavirus pandemic. The Dow Jones industrial average ended the day at 20,704.91, crossing back above 20,000. The 2,113-point gain beat a record set earlier this month amid a volatile market.

1:04 p.m. Federal prisons to quarantine new inmates: The Federal Bureau of Prisons will quarantine all new inmates entering its 122 facilities in an effort to quell the spread of coronavirus. New inmates will be isolated 14 days, the agency said in a statement. “As some prison officials have already warned, prisons are like petri dishes,” a bipartisan coalition of senators said in a letter to federal prisons director Michael Carvajal.

1 p.m. Calls grow for state to enforce AB5 against Uber, Lyft, Instacart, others: A collection of gig workers, unions and San Francisco supervisors are calling on government officials to quickly enforce AB5, California’s new gig-work law that makes it harder for companies to claim that workers are independent contractors. People who drive or deliver for Uber, Lyft, Instacart, DoorDash and other gig companies urgently need the protections of being employees, such as paid sick leave, unemployment insurance, according to a resolution introduced Tuesday by supervisors Gordon Mar and Matt Haney.

12:45 p.m. Rep. Khanna calls for national shelter-in-place order: Rep. Ro Khanna, D-Fremont, and 19 of his colleagues in the House have sent President Trump a letter calling for a national shelter-in-place order to slow the spread of the coronavirus. In the letter sent Tuesday, Khanna wrote, “If we wait to act until the number of sick and dead reaches a certain threshold, then it will be too late. A state-by-state, locality-by-locality approach is not enough.” Khanna warned Trump that an influx of coronavirus patients could quickly overwhelm the healthcare system and exceed the number of hospital beds and ventilators. He added that the national order needs to last at least two weeks to slow the virus.

12:38 p.m. Second death reported in Alameda County as known cases of COVID-19 grow: Health officials in Alameda County reported the second death related to COVID-19 on Tuesday while the number of confirmed cases grew to 124.

12:30 p.m. Second Oakland police employee tests positive: A second Oakland police employee tested positive for COVID-19, a department spokeswoman said Tuesday. The employee, whose unit was not disclosed, has not worked since Wednesday and is currently recovering while in quarantine.

12:15 p.m. More national parks close: Three of America’s most well-known national parks — Yellowstone, Grand Teton and the Great Smoky Mountains — closed Tuesday. They join a growing list of parks closing despite an announcement last week by Interior Secretary David Bernhardt that the agency would temporarily waive entrance fees at national parks, monuments and wildlife refuges to make it easier for people to get outdoors and “implement some social distancing.” The latest closures follow shutdowns at Yosemite in California and Rocky Mountain in Colorado. The National Park Service also previously closed the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island in New York Harbor and Alcatraz in San Francisco.

12:05 p.m. Fourth Santa Clara Sheriff’s deputy tests positive for COVID-19: The Santa Clara Sheriff’s Office said a fourth deputy has tested positive for COVID-19. The deputy, who was assigned to the office’s custody bureau, has self-isolated at home. Authorities said they continue to monitor the situation and are working to mitigate any more exposure.

11:32 a.m. Trump is “his own state of emergency,” Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf says: In an appearance on KTVU, Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf on Tuesday said President Trump has exhibited “poor leadership” throughout the coronavirus outbreak. “Going from, you know, Obama blaming to denial to now downplaying the seriousness of this crisis — it is so reprehensible that he is not giving American people the truth,” Schaaf said. “I’ve been extremely disappointed. Yes, we are going to have a big economic recovery in front of us, but we have got to put people’s health before profits. That is what we are very clear about here in the Bay Area and in California. I think that Gov. Newsom has created a much better example of what leadership looks like.” Before the end of the segment, Schaaf added: “I have been incredibly disappointed in this president. He is a disaster. He’s his own state of emergency.”

11:29 a.m. Greta Thunberg says she may have had coronavirus: Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg said in an Instagram post that she believes she contracted the coronavirus following a trip around central Europe. While Thunberg said she was never tested, she exhibited symptoms consistent with COVID-19 and spent two-weeks in isolation away from her family before recovering. “We who don’t belong to a risk group have an enormous responsibility,” she said. “Our actions can be the difference between life and death for many others.”

11:22 a.m. Officials in Napa County confirm third COVID-19 case: Napa County on Tuesday announced the third confirmed COVID-19 case. “Due to medical privacy requirements and to protect identity, further information about this case will not be released at this time,” county officials said in a Facebook post.

10:54 a.m. Dr. Fauci says there’s no rift with Trump: During an interview with a Washington, D.C. radio show Tuesday morning, Dr. Anthony Fauci tried to end the appearance of a spat with President Trump. The director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases has consistently disputed Trump’s comments about the coronavirus pandemic, but Fauci said: “We have a much bigger problem here than trying to point out differences. … The president has listened to what I’ve said and what the other people on the task force have said. When I’ve made recommendations, he’s taken them. He’s never countered and overridden me. The idea of pitting one against the other is just not helpful, and I’d wish that would stop, so we can look ahead at the challenge we have together to get over this thing.”

10:50 a.m. Santa Clara officials say 3 more people have died of COVID-19: Health officials in Santa Clara County say three more people have died of COVID-19, while an additional 54 people have tested positive for the virus, increasing the total number of known infected individuals in the county to 375. Sixteen people have died in the county.

10:48 a.m. Alameda County sheriff asks residents to report shelter-in-place violations: The Alameda County Sheriff’s Office announced a new email address to report violations of the shelter-in-place order: covid19compliance@acgov.org.

10:44 a.m. Twitter pledges $1 million to journalism organizations: Twitter officials said they would donate $1 million to be split evenly between two journalism organizations, the Committee to Protect Journalists and the International Women’s Media Foundation, as the coronavirus outbreak starts to take a toll on the already struggling news industry. Officials of the tech giant said the funds will be used to ensure the two organizations can continue supporting journalists. “Right now, every journalist is a COVID-19 journalist,” officials said in announcing the donation. “Journalism is core to our service and we have a deep and enduring responsibility to protect that work. This week we’re contributing to two critical organizations that are working tirelessly to uphold the fundamental values of a free press during this pandemic.”

10:41 a.m. Six Bay Area counties, Berkeley order private labs to report more COVID-19 testing data: Health officials for Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, San Francisco, San Mateo and Santa Clara counties, as well as the city of Berkeley, announced Tuesday an order to demand laboratories report coronavirus test results for all residents tested — not just those who test positive. “The new order requires laboratories to report all positive, negative and inconclusive results, and information that allows health officials to better locate the person tested,” officials said. “The more comprehensive information will improve health officials’ understanding of the rates of infection and the location of possible infection clusters.”

10:40 a.m. White House Coronavirus Task Force isn’t worried about COVID-19 mutations: Though the coronavirus is constantly mutating, Dr. Deborah Birx said she isn’t worried about a second wave of spread. Speaking at a virtual town hall on Fox News, the response coordinator for the White House Coronavirus Task Force said studies show that coronavirus is keeping most of its “structural pieces” when mutating, meaning people who make effective antibodies shouldn’t get re-infected.

10:39 a.m. Hawaii records first coronavirus death: A person in Oahu is the first state resident to die from COVID-19, according to the Hawaii Department of Health. The state also reported 21 more people were confirmed to have coronavirus on Monday, raising the total case count in Hawaii to 77.

10:27 a.m. Walmart, others hiring workers: Walmart and Support.com are among the companies hiring in response to the huge leaps in demand for grocery deliveries, tech support and other needs of those staying at home to comply with shelter-in-place orders. See the latest list of who’s hiring in the Bay Area and nationwide.

10:26 a.m. Trump suggests country could be back to normal by Easter: President Trump said in a Fox News appearance that he “would love to have” the country back to normal and people working by Easter. “That is April 12, so we will watch what happens,” a Fox News host responded. “Good,” Trump said. Earlier Tuesday, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said health experts had advised him that the “apex” of the pandemic will likely hit the state in two to three weeks. That would be somewhere between April 7-14.

10:20 a.m. Trump upset by health experts’ recommendations: President Trump, appearing on a “town hall” on Fox News, said he had never heard of “such a thing” when health experts told him the country should shut down borders and advise people to shelter at home to slow the spread of the coronavirus. “I said, ‘What are you talking about?’” Trump called the decision “one of the most difficult decisions” he’s ever made. and he repeatedly cited statistics of flu fatalities per year and how the nation had not shut down in the past. “I wasn’t happy about it,” Trump said, adding that he did not take the idea well. Trump said shut down has been “painful” for the country, but then he pivoted by saying people have to go back to work. “People can go back to work and practice good judgment,” he said. This is not what health experts are saying. The have advised non-essential workers to stay home.

10:15 a.m. Harvard University president, wife test positive: President Larry Bacow and his wife, Adele, have tested positive for COVID-19 and are being treated at home, according to a letter posted to the Harvard University website. “This virus can lay anyone low. We all need to be vigilant and keep following guidelines to limit our contact with others,” Bacow said.

9:54 a.m. Pence says White House not considering nationwide lockdown: Vice President Mike Pence said there will not be a nationwide lockdown or stay-at-home order amid the coronavirus pandemic. Speaking during a virtual town hall on Fox News, Pence said: “I can tell you that, at no point, has the White House Coronavirus Task Force discussed what some people call a ‘nationwide lockdown.’” Pence said he supports the states that have adopted stay-at-home mandates, but he believes the White’s House’s “15-day plan” will significantly reduce the spread of COVID-19.

9:44 a.m. Publishers for NY Times, The Post, Wall St. Journal call on Chinese govt. to allow journalists: The publishers of the New York Times, The Washington Post and The Wall Street Journal wrote an open letter to the Chinese government after American reporters for the newspapers were expelled from the country. “This move — made in retaliation for recent expulsions by the United States government — is one that we would protest under any circumstances,” the publishers wrote. “But it is uniquely damaging and reckless as the world continues the struggle to control this disease, a struggle that will require the free flow of reliable news and information.”

9:17 a.m. WHO says U.S. has potential to become coronavirus epicenter: World Health Organization spokeswoman Margaret Harris told reporters Tuesday the United States, where health officials have seen an acceleration in infections, has the potential to become the new epicenter of the virus, according to a Reuters report. In the last 24 hours, 80% of new cases were from Europe and the U.S., according to the report. When Harris was asked if the U.S. could become the epicenter, she reportedly said: “We are now seeing a very large acceleration in cases in the U.S. So it does have that potential. We cannot say that is the case yet but it does have that potential.”

9:05 a.m. Nineteen new cases in San Mateo County: San Mateo County health officials said there were 19 new confirmed cases of COVID-19, increasing the county total to 161.

8:58 a.m. San Francisco announces 21 new COVID-19 cases: San Francisco announced 21 new confirmed cases of COVID-19, increasing the total to 152 cases, according to the department of public health.

8:32 a.m. Former Stanford star Jason Collins tests positive for COVID-19: Jason Collins, who in 2014 became the first openly gay athlete to play in any of the four major North American pro sports leagues, announced on social media that he tested positive for COVID-19. Collins, whose brother Jarron is an assistant coach for the Warriors, played 13 NBA seasons after being an All-American at Stanford. Jason Collins said he had his first symptoms March 11, and headaches were followed by a fever and cough. (Correction: A previous version of this item misstated Jason Collins’s work history.)

8:27 a.m. NY governor says state has nearly 5,000 new COVID-19 cases in one day: In a televised address, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Tuesday the state had 4,790 new confirmed cases of COVID-19, increasing the total in the state to 25,665.

8:25 a.m. India’s prime minister orders 3-week lockdown: During a televised address, India Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced a “total lockdown” set to be activated Wednesday, according to the Associated Press.

8:11 a.m. NY governor says state is 2 weeks from “apex” of pandemic: New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said the apex of the pandemic was “higher and sooner” than previously thought, estimating the state is two to three weeks away from many people falling gravely ill. “We are scaling hospital capacity as fast as humanly possible,” Cuomo said in a string of Tweets. In another tweet, Cuomo said officials projected a need for 110,000 hospital beds, but the rate of infection is increasing and new projections estimate the need is now about 140,000 beds. Additionally, the state needs 30,000 ventilators, he said. “It will be the difference between life and death,” Cuomo said. “The federal government must provide these ventilators. Only the federal government has the power to deliver.”

7:50 a.m. Trump suggests people should go back to work while risk remains high: President Donald Trump said Tuesday morning that people want to return to work and Congress should approve a relief bill as soon as possible, tossing away objections top health officials have raised, saying the worse of the outbreak has yet to come. “Our people want to return to work. They will practice Social Distancing and all else, and Seniors will be watched over protectively & lovingly,” Trump said in a tweet. “We can do two things together. THE CURE CANNOT BE WORSE (by far) THAN THE PROBLEM! Congress MUST ACT NOW. We will come back strong!” This is not the first time Trump has suggested the cure — i.e. saving people’s lives — might not be worth the negative impact on the U.S. economy.

7:32 a.m. Federal court in San Jose closed after frequent visitor tests positive: The federal courthouse in San Jose will be closed starting Tuesday until April 7 after a recent visitor to the court began treatment for COVID-19, officials said. Court officials said they were told Monday that a person who went to the building March 11, 13 and 17 has since tested positive for the virus. There are no exceptions to the closure, which may be extended beyond April 7, officials said. Other federal courthouses in Northern California remain closed to anyone except those conducting “official court business.”

7:17 a.m. Owners boarding up SF storefronts — city’s fine with that: Dozens of restaurants and retail businesses across San Francisco are boarding up their storefronts with plywood, lending the normally lively retail corridors a feeling of neighborhoods about to be slammed by a hurricane, rather than one under siege by a pandemic. While the improvised wooden barricades violate building codes, city enforcement agencies said the property owners who nail plywood over their shop windows and doors to prevent theft or vandalism during the shelter-in-place will not be cited. Read the full story.

7:08 a.m. The coronavirus’s economic impact and how to get help: Chronicle reporters Kathleen Pender and Carolyn Said answer questions about seeking financial help and the coronavirus’ impact on the economy.

7:05 a.m. What older people and their loved ones need to know about the coronavirus: As Gov. Gavin Newsom and local Bay Area officials urge people to stay home, this is what older individuals and their loved ones need to know.

7:00 a.m. Answers to your questions about food and groceries: The Chronicle answers your questions about buying food and groceries throughout the Bay Area.

6:36 a.m. Markets rise sharply: The Dow Jones was up 6.8% and the S&P 500 was up 6.3% in early trading amid hopes that Congress will strike a deal on a massive bill to boost the economy.

6:31 a.m. It’s gotten much harder to move: Countless Bay Area residents were in the process of moving to new homes when the shelter-in-place orders arrived. San Francisco officials say people can still move, but they must observe social distancing protocols. It’s not easy. Click here for the story.

6:15 a.m. Caltrans stops collecting cash at Bay Area tolls: Caltrans officials said they have suspended cash toll collection at seven bridges in the Bay Area, switching over to electronic payment. The tolls include crossings on the Antioch, Benicia-Martinez, Carquinez, Dumbarton, Richmond-San Rafael, San Francisco-Oakland Bay and San Mateo-Hayward bridges. Drivers who usually pay in cash are advised to slowly drive through tolls, which will be unstaffed, and a camera will capture their license plate number to send an invoice. Officials warned the invoice will say “Toll Violation Notice,” but it is not a violation and the amount due will be the cost of the toll.

6:09 a.m. Arizona man reportedly dies after taking fish tank cleaner chloroquine phosphate: A man in Phoenix died and his wife is in critical condition after they took chloroquine phosphate, which is used as an additive to fish tank cleaner, according to several news reports. The additive is also found in an anti-malaria drug President Trump has praised as a treatment for the virus. It was unclear if the couple ingested the drug specifically because of COVID-19.

5:37 a.m. COVID-19 cases across the globe inches toward 400,000: The number of confirmed COVID-19 cases across the world the number grew Tuesday morning to 392,331, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University. Approximately 17,156 people have died.

5:33 a.m. Japan’s Prime Minister says Olympics will be postponed: Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe confirmed the 2020 Tokyo Olympics will be postponed for about a year because of the coronavirus pandemic, according to multiple news reports. Chronicle columnist Ann Killion wrote on Monday how everyone knew this was coming, except the International Olympic Committee.

Over the last 24 hours I have developed mild symptoms and tested positive for coronavirus.



I am now self-isolating, but I will continue to lead the government’s response via video-conference as we fight this virus.



Together we will beat this. #StayHomeSaveLives pic.twitter.com/9Te6aFP0Ri — Boris Johnson #StayHomeSaveLives (@BorisJohnson) March 27, 2020

We now have 4 confirmed cases of COVID-19 amongst our staff. The fourth case is a deputy assigned to the Custody Bureau, who is self-isolating and under quarantine at home. We are continuing to monitor the situation and are working to mitigate further exposure.#COVID19 — SantaClaraCoSheriff (@SCCoSheriff) March 24, 2020

It’s crazy I even have to say it: People’s lives are more important than profits. By taking decisive action now, we can avoid needless suffering. #StayAtHome pic.twitter.com/eRQnMirxNK — Libby Schaaf (@LibbySchaaf) March 24, 2020