One of the more popular conspiracy theories about the origins of coronavirus is that it is a bioweapon developed by the Chinese in the Wuhan Virology Institute. Some people think it was either accidentally released because of a lack of precaution or was intentionally unleashed by the Chinese government to wreak havoc in the West and help pave the way for China’s ascension as the world’s foremost power.

Though new reports suggest that coronavirus was created in the Wuhan Virology Institute, the theory that it was created in that lab as a bioweapon does not hold water if China’s strategy to attain global power is carefully examined. In fact, the spread of coronavirus may seriously hamper China’s efforts toward global hegemony.

One of the most serious effects the coronavirus pandemic has had on the world is the near shutdown of global trade. The World Trade Organization estimates a drop in global trade in 2020 between 13% and 32% — a dip larger than that seen during the Great recession of 2008 — because of coronavirus.

China depends on globalization and free trade in order to fund its international propaganda, military expansion and investment initiatives designed to bring poor countries under Chinese dependence. Without the annual $2.4 trillion in exports China reaps from its global trade, it will not have the funds to further efforts to expand its power on the global stage. (RELATED: As Coronavirus Spreads, Most Of America’s Medicine Still Comes From China)

Already, Chinese exports have slumped. Exports were down a combined 17.2% in January and February, and they were down a further 14% in March, according to Reuters. China’s first quarter GDP growth is expected to contract by 10% from a year earlier. Two investment banks have predicted that if China enters a recession because of coronavirus, second quarter GDP growth could dip below zero. China’s annual growth rates have been steadily declining over the past decade, and a viral pandemic that shuts down world trade could not only tank growth for all of 2020 but also accelerate the previous decline.

If coronavirus was a bioweapon, its country of origin would be one of the hardest hit economically because of the massive hit to global trade. China depends on high-growth rates and large trade surpluses to fund its operations, and a viral bioweapon would directly work against that.

Another major component of China’s global strategy that has been hampered by coronavirus is its spread of influence and propaganda through investment projects. China’s Belt and Road Initiative and its 5G campaign could be in jeopardy because of the fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. (RELATED: Elite American Institutions Keep Bowing To Communist China… Over And Over Again)

The Belt and Road Initiative is a development and investment strategy implemented by China in 2013 that seeks to provide funding for infrastructure and investments to create closer economic ties between its partner countries and China. The Chinese government has loaned and invested over $1 trillion since 2013.

Critics of the plan have claimed that it is an attempt by China to increase its influence throughout the world by loaning money to small, poor nations that cannot easily pay back them back. In 2018, the Center for Global Development claimed that 23 countries, including Pakistan, Montenegro, Mongolia, and Laos, had a high level of risk of debt distress because of the loans from China under Belt and Road. Sri Lanka was forced to relinquish control of a strategic Indian Ocean port as part of a repayment settlement after Sri Lanka was unable to repay its loans.

China has also managed to implant its own police forces and enforce its own laws in major European cities like Rome, Paris and Milan — where Chinese tourism is becoming a major part of those cities’ economies. Chinese police have also shown up in countries where China has made significant investments. The Chinese telecommunications company Huawei has helped build a massive surveillance system in Belgrade, Serbia.

Many Belt and Road projects were put on hold once China put Hubei Province, which contains the city of Wuhan, the origin of coronavirus, on lockdown. And future projects may be similarly delayed because of the global economic slump.

The roads, airports and general improvements made to these poorer countries in Africa and the Balkans foster increased trade, movement and overall interconnectedness that allow diseases like coronavirus to spread more quickly. So the infrastructure built with Chinese loans may have exacerbated the spread of coronavirus in Belt and Road countries, potentially making other countries wary of taking such loans (and for such projects) in the future.

China’s 5G initiative may also be affected by coronavirus. The pandemic has caused Conservative politicians in the U.K., which has seen 108,000 cases and over 14,000 deaths from coronavirus, to protest Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s plan to allow Huawei to help build the UK’s 5G network. Huawei has also been accused of sending protective masks to countries that have not yet made a decision on 5G, such as France and the Netherlands, to curry favor with those countries. Both France and Canada have announced that Huawei’s mask donations will not affect their decision on 5G, but a growth in anti-Chinese sentiment could derail those plans.

Indeed, a wave of anti-Chinese sentiment has swept over a lot of the world as coronavirus has spread. France, Australia, South Korea, Vietnam and Japan have seen a marked rise in anti-Chinese racism.

Spain, Turkey and the Netherlands are angry at China for supposedly providing faulty medical equipment to fight coronavirus.

“Resentment against China in Europe is palpable,” Jorg Wuttke of the European Chamber of Commerce said.

In the U.S., anti-China sentiment has widespread bipartisan support. Ninety percent of Republicans and 67 percent of Democrats said the Chinese government is responsible for the spread of the virus. While blame doesn’t necessarily mean hatred, 71 percent of Republicans and 41 percent of Democrats believe that China should pay restitution for the virus. Finally, 66 percent of Republicans and 8 percent of Democrats agree that President Donald Trump should take a tougher stance against China.

China’s overall strategy to gain power on the international stage has been a subtle one for the most part. It has decided to win over nations through massive investments and careful propaganda intended to cultivate a positive image of the Chinese state and culture. The country also has engaged in stage-by stage military expansion designed not to raise international ire.

A bioweapon that disrupts each of these components goes against China’s so far successful strategy. Given the effects the virus has had on China’s projects, it makes little to no sense for the Chinese government to create a bioweapon like coronavirus, much less release it.