CLOSE

Edith Sánchez Loaeza of Phoenix works at El Fenix Panaderia. She’s lived in the U.S. without legal status for 15 years. She says undocumented migrants contributed to and love America. She doesn’t understand why there’s no federal or regional financial support to help migrants survive a global pandemic. (Photo: Dianna M. Náñez/The Republic)

Desert sun filters through the cast-iron screen door of the small Phoenix bakery, where Edith is sanitizing thick glass counters encasing trays of pan dulce, Mexican sweet bread.

She eyes the entrance to El Fenix Panaderia. She waits, wonders and worries.

Who will come today? Who still has enough money for fresh bakery foods or handmade tortillas?

Pan dulce is part of this South Phoenix Latino community’s morning tradition. Fresh polvorones, Mexican sugar cookies, in red, green and white, baked conchas that look like sugar-dusted pin cushions, and gingerbread pigs, marranitos in Spanish.

When the pandemic christened by public health officials “el nuevo coronavirus” hit, Edith's regulars still came. They bought their favorite pan dulce, stocked up on tortillas and took home Our Lady of Guadalupe candles to light in prayer.

Then sickness spread.

“We don’t get as many people anymore,” Edith Sánchez Loaeza says in Spanish, furrowing her brow. "And the ones who come, it’s sad, they get the clearance bread — it’s all they can afford now.”

When any customer arrives, Edith smiles big, wishes them well and tries to keep her distance. She doesn’t have a mask or rubber gloves. She wipes surfaces clean between each customer.

But it’s not a deadly virus Edith fears most. Edith, 45, is living in the U.S. without legal immigration status. She can’t afford not to work. Her worst fear is when there aren't enough customers for her to keep coming to the bakery.

Like thousands of undocumented migrants across Arizona and the U.S., Edith has no economic stimulus check coming to help her family endure the financial, emotional and physical fallout of a global pandemic with America at its epicenter.

Edith hears people complain about facing all this from the comfort and safety of their home while earning a paycheck working from their laptop.

She wonders if they understand what it’s like to have your world turned upside down by a deadly virus when you don't speak the language of government and health officials. When you don't qualify for financial support to weather the fallout. When you have no choice but to keep going to work.

“We know a virus does not discriminate. It won’t ask you, ‘Do you have papers or not?” Reyna Montoya

Spanish-speaking undocumented communities may not understand every order from Arizona’s governor, but they know life is about to get more difficult.

One migrant man at a hardware store looking for parts for his air-conditioning job wonders if Gov. Doug Ducey’s stay-at-home order means police are going to stop him for driving to work.

Another man cutting weeds in a commercial lot says he lives in a rental house with four other men so he can send more money to his wife and children in Mexico. He says he'd rather be safe at home than working alongside a crew of men who could expose him to the coronvirus. Still, each night, he prays for more work.

An undocumented mother waiting at a bus stop with her child is worrying because she couldn't find groceries she needed. She says migrants are on the frontline of work that keeps America running. We’re risking our lives to feed you, build your homes, she says.

Edith says her husband's construction work has slowed. She doesn’t understand why there’s no federal financial support for undocumented migrants who contribute to the U.S. economy.

MORE: Coronavirus answers for immigrant and Spanish-language communities

The U.S. civilian workforce includes 7.6 million immigrants without legal status, according to a 2019 Pew Report tracking shifts in migration from 2007 to 2017. Migrants without legal status paid an estimated $12 billion in Social Security taxes in 2010 alone, without an opportunity to receive benefits, according to a Social Security actuary report. The Institute for Taxation and Economic Policy estimated undocumented immigrants contribute $11.74 billion annually in state and local taxes.

After 15 years in the U.S., Edith wonders if it's time to return to Mexico. Time to recognize that migrants aren’t seen as humans in Trump’s America, she says.

“Do they want us to go hungry?” she asks. “To die?”

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Help for undocumented families?

Arizona organizations that support migrants say the new coronavirus hit too fast. They’re struggling to feed families, to ensure they’re getting medical attention, to raise funds to pay bills. And many churches, a longtime backstop for migrant families, have closed to stem the spread of the virus.

Our Lady of Guadalupe altar at St. Catherine of Siena parish in Phoenix across the street from El Fenix Panaderia. Signs are posted that all masses have been canceled. “Our Lady of Guadalupe, patroness of the Diocese of Phoenix, pray for us. Be Healthy. Be Smart. Be Holy. Se Saludable. Se Inteligente. Se Santo.” (Photo: Dianna M. Náñez/The Republic)

“There are no real resources right now,” said Viridiana Hernandez, executive director of Poder in Action, a human rights organization focused on immigration, education and criminal justice systems. “This is a critical conversation as undocumented people continue to be cut (off) from any relief, while at the same time the cities and state ask them to fill out the census for services and programs that they don’t have access to.”

Arizona migrant-rights organizations are discussing establishing a relief fund for undocumented families. Nothing is finalized.

For now, when people call Hernandez for help, she directs them to food banks that don't ask for ID and to Puente Human Rights Movement, which gives away food on Mondays with no questions about legal status.

Maxima Guerrero, of Puente, said undocumented laborers are risking their health, their lives by continuing to work.

“They don’t have the luxury of working from home,” she said. “Many of them are the front-line workers. It has been on my mind lately, do they even have leverage to fight for their rights? To say, ‘Hey, wait a minute this is not safe.’”

Hernandez is working with a community-based COVID-19 mutual aid network that will deliver food and other essentials to people, regardless of immigration status. But they don’t have enough translatorsto support calls from Spanish-speaking communities.

Fears for undocumented workers are heightened, Hernandez said, because many distrust government officials and worry stay-at-home orders could be used to deport them.

“Our lives have changed, our children's lives have changed, everything has changed.” Undocumented Mother

For Reyna Montoya it’s personal. She is a DACA recipient and heads Aliento, an organization serving undocumented children and families.

Montoya sees undocumented families suffering and all she can do is host a weekly Instagram and Facebook live to inform them of health and government updates, ones that leave them out. She answers questions. Mostly, she tries to ease fears.

On Thursday, Montoya explained on video that even migrant workers who pay U.S. taxes using an Individual Tax Identification Number won't qualify for federal financial support.

"It’s caused us much sadness to see how many families are suffering," she says. "And having to make a very unjust decision to expose themselves to getting sick by going to work or to not eat and not have the resources to keep living in their houses due to this great healthcare crisis.”

She urged people to renew their DACA applications, which allows younger undocumented individuals to work legally. On video, she reaches her hands out to those watching as she explains that only people with valid Social Security numbers will qualify for federal financial programs to help weather the public-health crisis.

“This is very, very unjust,” she says in Spanish. “We know a virus does not discriminate. It won’t ask you, ‘Do you have papers or not?’”

At a town hall to discuss the coronavirus crisis in Arizona, Ducey was asked his message to the undocumented community.

"Listen, wash your hands. If you’re sick, stay at home. Cover your cough and physically distance," he said. "We're focused on public health right now in the state of Arizona. We're doing our best to communicate so that everyone will understand that this is a disease and a virus that knows no border, it knows no class or background or distinction. We're focused on protecting everyone who is in the state of Arizona today."

When asked what he would advise people who are afraid to go to work or seek medical care because they are undocumented,Ducey offered no additional guidance or reassurance.

Montoya tells families Aliento's created a petition to appeal to Congressional leaders discussing an additional economic stimulus package to include undocumented families in humanitarian aid.

Each day, Aliento updates an online guide in Spanish and English to inform the community of resources. Rep. Raquel Terán, D-Phoenix, has created an anonymous survey to measure needs of the undocumented community. She's advocating for Arizona to follow other regions, like Minneapolis, where migrants without legal status are eligible for emergency funds.

Ducey announced programs to delay housing foreclosures, as well as evictions for renters and small business owners leasing commercial space. However, migrant-rights advocates say undocumented families could be taken advantage by lessors or bankers who misinform them of their rights.

The state's coronavirus website for the public provides information in Spanish but several sites people are referred to lack Spanish-speakers.

Native Health, Mexican Consulate team for medical needs: 'Come get help'

The Mexican consulate office in Phoenix closed because of the pandemic. Officials use social media and the consulate website to communicate with Mexican nationals.

They're directing people without legal status to food banks andlocal schools where their children can access free meals without questions.

Rocillo Rodriguez, of the consulate office, said it's understandably scary for Mexican nationals to have the office closed for in-person services as a deadly virus spreads, but stressing that consular services are still available, she encouraged people to call for help.

She urged anyone needing medical care to call Ventanilla de Salud, a Mexican-government public-health program that typically operates from consular offices. Through an intergovernmental partnership, while the regular sites are closed, indigenous governments are providing medical care for Mexican nationals at Native Health in Phoenix, where services are available on a sliding fee scale with no questions asked about legal status.

At Native Health, a bilingual community health worker assesses health needs and refers patients to a doctor on-site for further medical care, including coronavirus testing. Patients need an ID but it can be from any country.

"It doesn't matter if they're uninsured or undocumented," said Maricarmen Cervantes, a community health worker at the clinic. "I want to emphasize that if they’re sick to not be afraid. Come get help, even if it's not coronavirus symptoms. It can be anything. You don't have to be a Native American, it can be anyone."

Rodriguez fears many Spanish-speaking families aren't receiving vital health information about COVID-19.

"We really need to spread the message to our community that we have to safeguard grandparents," she said, "We know they love their grandchildren, but we ... we need them to remain safe and limit contact between children and our elderly."

She understands fears migrants have over confusing stay-at-home orders. She stressed that they should remain as cautious as they were before about driving, but that nothing in Ducey’s order allows police to stop them for driving to essential work such as construction jobs.

Rodriguez said Mexico has closed its border to tourists but remains open to Mexican nationals crossing for other reasons, though a health exam may be required to ensure they aren't exhibiting coronavirus symptoms.

'We're being left behind'

A landscaper battles weeds in a Phoenix lot. (Photo: Dianna M. Náñez/The Republic)

A man wearing a straw hat and long-sleeve shirt is cutting weeds in a large Phoenix lot next to an apartment.

He doesn't know what he'll do if he loses his job with a Valley landscaping company.

He has about $200 saved. He sends the bulk of his checks home to his wife and children in Puebla, Mexico. He’s 54 now, but was in his early 40s when he came to the U.S. He shares a rental home with four other men. The man, who asked not to be identified for fear of being deported or losing his job, said he doesn’t know how they’ll afford rent if they can’t work.

He's heard nothing about where to get food, medical care or any economic support for undocumented migrants.

On Tuesday, his supervisor told him it may be his last day working.

“They told me to wait for a call in the morning,” he says in Spanish. “I’m scared. I’d rather be home safe, but I need to keep working.”

A mother keeps her little girl close to her as they cross the street to wait for the bus. She's from Toluca, Mexico, but has lived in Arizona 14 years. Her husband works in landscaping, without legal status, while she cares for their four children. The youngest is 2. The oldest is 11.

“It’s harder than before," she says in Spanish. "Our lives have changed, our children's lives have changed, everything has changed."

The woman, who also asked not to be identified by name, took the bus with her child to get groceries, but she's going home empty-handed.

"It’s hard now to get food,” she says, glancing at her daughter. “It’s harder in the bus because you have to be so close to others. I’m scared to contract the virus."

She doesn’t know how long their savings will last, it depends on her husband's work. His hours have been cut. She fears this will be his last week of work. She struggles to stay informed.

“The majority of news is in English,” she says.

"We’re being left behind because the help is based on the idea that the only people working are those who have papers,” she says. "And that’s a lie. Because the people who move this country forward are everyone who works in the fields, in construction, everything."

She prays for her husband, terrified that he will fall ill going to work without a mask or any protective gear.

She wants people to know migrants are "forced to make sacrifices, to keep going to work so they can keep eating."

Then people started dying

Will Garcia runs Del Monte Market in South Phoenix near the edges of Laveen. (Photo: Dianna M. Náñez/The Republic)

A steady flow of Del Monte Market regulars — farmworkers, immigrants and people who grew up in South Phoenix and Laveen — enter the faded, squat brick building. Opened in 1908 on a narrow farm road, it's considered the longest continuously running grocery store in Arizona.

Will Garcia bought the market a few years ago after moving to the Valley from California. He’s been running it alone for two weeks since his one worker, a man in his 70s, stopped coming after the coronavirus started spreading. He understands because people in high-risk groups were warned the virus could kill them.

Garcia says many of his Spanish-speaking clients didn’t take the virus seriously when it first hit. About half his customers are Latino of mixed legal statuses.

“They made jokes,” he says. “They thought it was a flu because that’s what the president said it was.”

Then people started dying. “Now it’s like reality, ‘Wow, this is real,’” he says.

He sees some customers wearing makeshift face masks. His Spanish-speaking customers mostly work in the fields or construction and often don’t have time to watch the news.

A group of construction workers speaking Spanish buys water and beer. A woman warns her boyfriend not to touch the door handle with his hands. He shrugs her off. No one is trying to stand six feet apart.

Garcia takes the virus seriously. Garcia says he’s trained himself not to touch his face. He mixed bleach and water in a spray bottle he usesto disinfect his hands.

He is Puerto Rican and was born in New York, where coronavirus deaths and cases have outpaced other U.S. states.

“I have family still there,” he says, shaking his head.

'I ask God' to stop the virus

It's almost sunset when a man with cropped black hair and work boots on arrives at a Phoenix hardware store. He needs parts for his job as a service repairman with a Valley air-conditioning company. But the store closed. It’s hours cut during the crisis.

His wife is scared he's still going to work and scared for their community.

“That illness is going to attack anyone,” he says in Spanish. “You have to protect yourself.”

He knows to stay six feet from people for physical distancing and his company is providing masks.

He says he listens to Radio Campesina, a radio station founded by César Chávez as part of the Farm Worker Movement, for news about the coronavirus.

The man, who asked not to be named, knows he doesn’t have to answer if anyone asks if he’s undocumented. But he’s seeing heightened security and fear because of the public-health crisis. He’s worried if Ducey’s stay-at-home order will cause more policing of undocumented communities.

“Are the police going to stop me for going to work?” he asks.

So far, he’s kept 40 hours of work at a business he likes and has worked for more than 15 years.

He prays for health, work and safety.

“I ask God,” he says. "He’s the only one we ask to see if this (virus) will stop."

'Treat us equally, we came to work'

CLOSE Edith Sánchez Loaeza of Phoenix works at El Fenix Panaderia. She’s lived in the U.S. without legal status for 15 years. She says undocumented migrants contributed to and love America. She doesn’t understand why there’s no federal or local financial support to help migrants survive a global pandemic. Arizona Republic

Edith is watching a woman opening the door to El Fenix bakery. She's careful not to touch the door with her hands and reminds her father. They pass the glass counters with pan dulce, the fresh tortillas and turn toward the bakery’s mini-market.

Whatever they're looking for, they don’t find it. They leave without buying anything. Edith smiles and waves. The virus is hurting everyone, she says, but it's hitting migrants harder.

“We’re panicked,” she says. "We’re so scared of the coronavirus. But we’re also scared because if there’s not work, how are we going to pay our bills?”

The government is telling us not to leave our house, to stay home, she says.

"Citizens who have papers ... they give them help," she says. "And all of us who came to work, to do work that people from here, citizens won’t do, so we do it. And they persecute us."

Edith says she's not afraid to speak up for migrants because she's worked hard and done right.

"Treat us equally, we came to work, we didn't come to do anything else," she says. "Be conscious of the fact that we move the economy ahead. Help us."

Are you undocumented and need help?

Puente Human Rights and Barrio Café are among the sites offering food banks not requiring ID or other information to receive meals. Additional food banks also don’t require legal immigration status but may ask for ID or proof that you live in the area, such as a utility bill with an address. Contact sites to confirm service times that may vary because of coronavirus.

Ventanilla de Salud, medical and behavioral healthcare, serves anyone, regardless of legal status. Operating through Native Health because of COVID-19: 602-279-5262, extension 3442: https://www.nativehealthphoenix.org/

Mexican Consulate Office, emergency referral services, 520-623-7874 or 602-330-3624: https://consulmex.sre.gob.mx/phoenix/

State COVID-19 resource site, including rental eviction prevention, mortgage assistance: https://arizonatogether.org/es/

COVID-19 mutual aid group, various support regardless of legal status: mutualaidphx.com

Puente Human Rights, support for Spanish-speaking migrant communities and food bank, 10 a.m. Monday mornings, 1937 W. Adams. Text the word “food” or “comida” to 480-506-7437 for information: http://puenteaz.org/

Chef Silvana Salcido Esparza with local restaurants, free meals, 5 p.m. daily, Barrio Café, 2814 N. 16th St., Phoenix: https://www.instagram.com/chefsilvana/

Harvest Compassion Center, food, hygiene, baby and clothing. Phoenix, 602-788-2444. Maryvale, 623-247-0039: https://harvestcompassioncenter.org/

Hope for Hunger, food bank, 602-773-4344: https://phoenixrescuemission.org/hope-for-hunger/

Neighborhood Ministries, food bank, 9:30-11 am. Fridays. 630-561-3009 or 602-332-9790: https://nmphx.com/programs/food-clothing-bank/

St. Vincent de Paul, meals to go, 602-850-6948 for local parish: https://www.stvincentdepaul.net/programs/dining-rooms/dining-room-locations

St. Mary’s Food Bank, mobile food pantry, 480-291-3237: https://www.firstfoodbank.org/

Andre House, meals, 602-255-0580: https://andrehouse.org/covid-19-response/

Additional Arizona food banks: http://www.azfoodbanks.org/index.php/foodbank

CDC COVID-19 information in Spanish: https://espanol.cdc.gov/enes/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html

2-1-1 COVID-19 Hotline for information in Spanish and English

Poder in Action, migrant-rights advocacy in Spanish and coronavirus updates: https://www.poderinaction.org/

Aliento, immigration, education and mental-health resources for migrants in Spanish. https://www.alientoaz.org/

Trans Queer Pueblo, support for migrant LGBTQ-plus communities: https://www.tqpueblo.org/

If you're an organization helping migrants without legal status, email dianna.nanez@arizonarepublic.com and The Republic will add your resource to this list.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/immigration/2020/04/10/no-relief-checks-arizonas-undocumented-workers-heres-why/2941271001/