Sen. Kamala Harris Kamala Devi Harris13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Biden told to think economy with VP pick Democratic senators: Airlines sitting on billion in 'customer cash' MORE (D-Calif.) said Thursday she would be “honored” to serve as former vice president and presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden Joe BidenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move GOP online donor platform expanded to state level Overnight Energy: US oil prices hit 18-year-low | Green groups, coal companies attack EPA power plant rollback from both sides | EPA weighs lifting ethanol requirements for oil refiners MORE’s running mate if asked, but said that her current focus is on addressing the coronavirus pandemic.

MSNBC’s Craig Melvin played a clip of Biden recalling that former President Obama told him there wasn't "a single important issue" they disagreed on. Asked if Harris fit the same description, Biden replied, “I think so,” but said he had not spoken directly to Harris on the matter.

"I have been focused 100 percent on this pandemic," Harris said when asked if she had spoken recently with Biden.

ADVERTISEMENT

“Obviously I would be honored if I were being considered, but I have to tell you right now my entire focus has been on what we need to do to get relief to Americans right now, because 22 million Americans as of today, just in the last few weeks, are unemployed. People are trying to figure out how to feed their babies and pay their rent,” she continued.

"I think what's most important is that we all join together, that we unify the party, that we unify the country and that we elect Joe Biden because Donald Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE does not know how to do the job,” she added.

Pressed by Melvin on whether she would accept if Biden asks her to serve as his vice president, Harris responded, “Obviously I’d be honored to serve with Joe.”

Biden has pledged to name a woman as his running mate. Sen. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth WarrenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move McConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (D-Mass.), who like Harris is a former competitor who has since endorsed Biden’s bid, told MSNBC's Rachel Maddow Rachel Anne MaddowWhitmer says protesters' 'irresponsible actions' can lead to extension of stay-at-home orders The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Harris on if she'd serve as Biden's VP: 'I'd be honored to serve with Joe' MORE on Wednesday night that she would accept if asked to serve as Biden’s running mate.

The former vice president has said he is working from a shortlist of six to 10 candidates, including Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer (D), though has not released a full list. Former Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams also said Wednesday that she would make an “excellent” running mate.