“Schitt’s Creek” is back for its sixth and final season — with its Roses still as sharp and thorny as ever.

Tuesday’s season opener (9 p.m. on Pop TV) picks up right where Season 5 left off: uptalker Alexis (series scene-stealer Annie Murphy) is preparing for her six-month sojourn to join fiancee Ted in the Galapagos Islands (“I’m moving to a place that doesn’t have a Sephora for literally 2,700 miles,” she says); David (Dan Levy) and Patrick (Noah Reid) are shopping around for wedding venues for their Big Day; histrionic, wig-wearing Moira (Catherine O’Hara) is dealing — badly — with snafus for her comeback movie, “The Crows Have Eyes: III”; and family patriarch Johnny (Eugene Levy) is trying to keep it all together while running the Rosebud Motel with an eye toward its financial future.

Had “Schitt’s Creek” ended after last season, that would have been fine with me since I thought it had exhausted its comedic premise of the fish-out-of-water Rose family — Johnny, Moira, Alexis and David — adjusting to, and eventually becoming ingrained in, their life in the podunk town of Schitt’s Creek, where they landed after the family’s home-video fortune evaporated. The joke was wearing thin.

But father/son series creators Eugene and Dan Levy decided on a final go ’round, and I’ll admit that I’m glad they did: both the performances and writing are razor-sharp (David describing the sound of a hog slaughter: “It’s like a thousand babies teething”) and, it turns out, there really are some stories left to tell and some more to learn about each of the characters as the season progresses.

As in year’s past, it’s Murphy — as the entitled-yet-lovable Alexis — who chews the scenery (in a good way) and who works her way around a zinger like she was born to play this character. Her studied wiftiness goes a long way toward softening the edges of David, though “Schitt’s Creek” wouldn’t be the same without his biting sarcasm and snarkiness to put the show’s eccentricities into context.

BBC America renewed “Killing Eve” for a fourth season ahead of its expected Season 3 premiere in April. That’s a big leap of faith for a series that had a weak, up-and-down sophomore season that veered toward silliness and probably should have ended then and there.

Jodie Comer’s 2019 Emmy win for Best Dramatic Actress (she plays psycho-killer Villanelle) went a long way toward assuring the show a third season. Notwithstanding how the show fared at Sunday night’s Golden Globes (both Comer and the series were nominated), that’s a tall order — and it will take a strong Season 3 to justify a fourth season.