Good evening, and welcome to our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Naaman Zhou bringing you the main stories on Monday 13 April.

Flattened curve ‘consolidated’ as travel drops over Easter

The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, said Australia was “now seeing consolidation of the flattening of the curve” after new cases continued to grow less than 2% a day. He revealed data that Australians were travelling 13% less this year compared to last year’s Easter holiday. That was over Thursday, Good Friday and Saturday – with Sunday’s data still to come. “We said before this weekend that Easter could be the most important weekend in our fight against the coronavirus,” he said. “Australians have done what we had hoped – and more.” However, he warned there could still be coming “outbreaks and spikes”.

Five thousand people in Tasmania lockdown

In what premier Peter Gutwein described as “unprecedented”, Tasmania has placed its northwest region under lockdown to stop the spread of a coronavirus cluster among doctors and medical staff. Of the state’s total 144 cases, 60 are linked to the northwest cluster, and of those 60, 42 are healthcare workers. Of the 11 new cases on Monday, eight were healthcare workers. As a result, two hospitals were closed on Monday, and the Australian defence force brought in. Five thousand people will be immediately quarantined: 1,200 hospital staff and their families. Tasmanian health authorities also said at least 300 people had already had close contacts with confirmed coronavirus cases in the northwest.

Death toll rises from Ruby Princess

Australia’s national death toll rose to 61 after two people in NSW, who were both passengers from the Ruby Princess cruise ship, died. A 74-year-old woman died in John Hunter hospital and a 79-year-old man died in Northern Beaches hospital. NSW Health’s acting director, Dr Christine Selvey, also said 66 crew members on the Ruby Princess have tested positive for Covid-19. Nationally, Australia now has 6,335 people diagnosed with Covid-19, 81 in intensive care and 35 on ventilators.

Queensland extends distance learning

Queensland has extended its school policies for at least the first five weeks of term two, as children prepare to return from school holidays. The same rules from the end of term one will apply – the schools will be open, but only for essential workers and those who have no other choice. This will be reviewed on 15 May. Meanwhile, Victoria has extended its state of emergency for another month. You can read a state by state guide to what’s happening with schools next term here.

NSW announces rent relief

The NSW government announced early details of a $440m package to help renters and owners affected by job losses. Renters who have lost at least 25% of their income due to the coronavirus will be protected from immediate eviction if they fall behind in their rent. Instead, landlords and tenants will be required to “negotiate in good faith”, and can only be evicted if the NSW civil and administrative tribunal is satisfied negotiations have concluded. Owners will then be given a land tax waiver or rebate up to 25% if they give tenants a rental reduction. However, the NSW Labor leader, Jodi McKay, said the plan was “disappointing” because only 16% of landlords paid land tax. Further details are still to be announced.

Immunity study and treatment trial

Australian scientists will start a national study to determine whether contracting coronavirus gives a person immunity, and how common that is. Professor Sharon Lewin from the Apprise Centre of Research Excellence said it would “lead a national zero prevalence study to understand how many people really are immune to coronavirus”. Thousands of people will be assessed through a blood test in the coming months. Lewin also said researchers were close to finishing a clinical trial of drugs that could treat Covid-19. She said she was “actually quite optimistic we will have results at least – whether the results are good or not so good – from many clinical trials in the next few weeks”.

Qantas staff consider class action

Qantas staff have begun exploring legal action after 59 employees and family members contracted Covid-19. The Flight Attendants’ Association of Australia said it was looking at a potential class action against the airline, accusing it of failing to protect staff from the disease. Qantas is about to restart limited international flights to Los Angeles, London, Auckland and Hong Kong.

Sydney swimmers call for beach restrictions to be lifted

Nearly 5,000 residents of Sydney’s eastern suburbs have signed a petition calling for beach bans to be lifted and allow swimming for exercise. However, the mayor of Waverley, Paula Masselos, said beaches would remain closed.

What you need to know: get the most important information from some of our key explainers

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian’s global network.