A summary of the major developments in the Covid-19 outbreak across the country

Australian cases rise to 3,400

The country’s number of confirmed coronavirus cases has risen to 3,400. The deputy chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, said the median age was 48, and 67% of the confirmed cases related to travel.

Death toll rises to 14

A 91-year-old woman from the Dorothy Henderson Lodge in Sydney died overnight from complications relating to Covid-19. She was the fourth person from that aged care facility to die from the disease.

A-League player tests positive

An unnamed A-League player has become the first Australian footballer to test positive for Covid-19. The Newcastle Jets player tested positive on Friday, the club has confirmed, only days after the A-League was postponed. The player was a member of the Jets’ squad for last weekend’s matches against Brisbane Roar and Melbourne City, according to AAP. The Jets said the player was asymptomatic and remained in good health.

Travellers prepare for hotel quarantine

Interstate coronavirus cases from Ruby Princess jump as more than 100 outside NSW test positive Read more

States and territories are preparing accommodation as new measures come into effect at midnight tonight. All travellers arriving in Australia from overseas must be quarantined in hotels for 14 days. They will be monitored by authorities to ensure they comply.

Queensland votes

Millions of Queenslanders turned out to vote in local government elections and two byelections, despite experts labelling this a “lethal risk”. Voters were told to bring their own pens and stay 1.5-metres from each other. The handing out of how-to-vote cards was banned.

Retailers close

More shops and retailers closed after Myer announced late on Friday night it would shut its stores. On Saturday the clothing stores Country Road and Cotton On, and the stationery store kikki.K followed suit. Total job losses across Australia have exceeded 75,000.

Mutual obligations suspended

Late on Friday night the government announced that it would extend the suspension of mutual obligations for jobseekers. Initially these had been suspended until 31 March but now that has been extended until 27 April.

Australian doctors return from Chilean cruise ship

More than 100 Australian doctors and dentists, who were stranded on a cruise ship off the coast of Chile, have returned to Australia.

NSW Health said they had arrived on an international flight, had their temperatures checked and “no passengers were identified as being unwell”. The doctors and dentists had been on the ship as part of a medical conference and now will return to homes or hotels for 14 days of quarantine.

Ruby Princess cases surpass 100 outside NSW

The number of coronavirus infections among passengers on the Ruby Princess cruise ship continued to rise. On Saturday there were 171 cases in NSW and 122 interstate. That includes 53 passengers in South Australia who have tested positive, 32 in Queensland and 21 in the Australian Capital Territory.