SALT LAKE CITY — Shelter the Homeless, which owns Salt Lake County’s three homeless resource centers, on Thursday announced the appointment of a new executive director.

After what officials described as an extensive search, Laurie Hopkins, who has served in a variety of leadership roles in the nonprofit sector — most recently as executive director of Discovery Gateway Children’s Museum — will step into the role.

“I am privileged to have the opportunity to serve as the new Shelter the Homeless executive director. I recognize that the community-wide system serving individuals experiencing homelessness is full of dedicated and special people and I am pleased to join this group in supporting this very important cause with a strategic and people-oriented approach,” Hopkins said in a statement.

She will take over the role of Preston Cochrane, who served as the organization’s executive director since 2017.

“We are delighted to have Laurie, a proven leader with strong management and financial skills, joining us as our new executive director,” Harris H. Simmons, president of Shelter the Homeless, said in the statement.

“The Shelter the Homeless board looks forward to working with Laurie as we support homeless resource center operators and other service providers in working to minimize homelessness and serve those in need. At the same time, we extend our heartfelt thanks to Preston Cochrane, who has served with tireless devotion in overseeing the successful construction of our three new homeless resource centers and ensuring a smooth transition from the former Rio Grande neighborhood shelter,” Simmons said.

The Deseret News has reached out to Cochrane for comment on his departure.

The transition from the downtown Salt Lake City Road Home shelter to three smaller centers represented a major adjustment in how Utah seeks to serve its homeless community through targeted resources. But the transition hasn’t come without challenges as officials have worked to help those experiencing homelessness adjust to changes, including the centers’ stricter rules.

Homelessness leaders also faced some backlash during the transition in January when a group camped in front of the Salt Lake City-County Building to protest what they described as full shelters after beds were lost when the Road Home’s downtown shelter closed. The encampment resulted in a police raid, in which 17 protesters were arrested.

Leaders soon after created a temporary overflow shelter in the Sugar House neighborhood.

“As a homeless services system, we just experienced a seismic shift in how we deliver services. Shelter the Homeless was integral to that shift from one emergency shelter to three new homeless resource centers. As we embark on this new chapter of serving those experiencing homelessness, we look forward to working alongside Laurie’s leadership to ensure this new system is working in the most efficient and effective way possible,” Salt Lake County Mayor Jenny Wilson said.