Jill Filipovic is a journalist based in Washington and the author of the book "The H-Spot: The Feminist Pursuit of Happiness." Follow her on Twitter. The opinions expressed in this commentary are solely her own. View more opinion articles on CNN.

(CNN) Big ideas? Check. Complex solutions broken down into digestible sound bites? Check. Heart-tugging anecdotes? Check. Authenticity? In spades.

Jill Filipovic

Elizabeth Warren nailed her CNN town hall Monday night. And even though she's not getting the breathless headlines of the B-boys -- Beto O'Rourke, Bernie Sanders, Joe Biden and Pete Buttigieg -- she's adeptly setting the bar for every other candidate in this race. The question now isn't her skill, style or substance. It's whether she'll get fair coverage from a political media eager to glom on to the shiny new thing, and unable to give a steady, competent woman her due.

Warren's performance wasn't perfect. She answered a question about affordable higher education and the rich being able to buy their way into nearly everything by talking about the influence of money in Washington, instead of addressing the college admissions scam in greater depth. Sometimes she dodged questions, such as when host Jake Tapper asked her specifically about reparations for slavery in the form of cash payments and about the possibility of eliminating private health insurance companies.

JUST WATCHED Warren: I'm tired of a Washington that works for the rich Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Warren: I'm tired of a Washington that works for the rich 01:39

But more often, she connected. There were multiple times when she seemed near tears: When she recounted seeing men, women, girls and boys in cages near our southern border, I found myself watching in jaw-clenched silence; the auditorium, too, went still and soundless.

Later, she told the story of her dad nearly dying of a heart attack and her mother , who had never worked outside the home, donning her best dress to go get a minimum wage job at Sears that kept the family afloat. The slightest waver crept into her voice as Warren talked about her own family's past. But when she connected it to our political present ("Today, in America, a full-time minimum wage job will not keep a mama and a baby out of poverty; I am in this fight because I believe that is wrong"), she got loud -- she got mad. It was real and it was righteous.

Read More