Detroit — President Donald Trump named Detroit and New Orleans as cities nationally that he believes are gaining ground in the battle against COVID-19.

The president, during a Friday afternoon news briefing, said the two cities "really started to go up," but now are "stabilizing."

"The situation in Detroit and New Orleans appears to be stabilizing," he said. "Detroit is really started to go up and now it is stabilizing, and New Orleans is a great place ... it's really stabilized."

The president's comments come as Michigan recorded its largest single-day increases in deaths so far. More than 200 people have died from the coronavirus since Thursday afternoon, Gov. Gretchen Whitmer said. The latest count brings the overall statewide total to 1,282.

Whitmer revealed the new death count on Twitter Friday afternoon in a message stressing that “we are not out of the woods yet.”

Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan agreed Friday that Detroit is "bending the curve," and if that's what Trump was suggesting, "it's true."

"There is no doubt the people in this city and the masks and the separation are doing it," he said. "But it's still a very dangerous time for Detroiters. We're seeing progress, but we're not letting up."

The mayor added Friday that he plans to continue telling the truth on the data. Three weeks ago, he said, when Michigan's numbers were down, he believed the state's cases would spike above California and Washington, and they did.

"It was bad news, but that's what I believed," he said.

Trump also noted nationwide the number of new cases is flattening substantially, suggesting "we are near the peak" and "our comprehensive strategy is working."

"Louisiana and the state of Michigan is doing really much better than we thought," he said.

President Donald Trump speaks during a coronavirus task force briefing at the White House on Friday in Washington, D.C. (Photo: Evan Vucci, AP)

The president, during his briefing Friday, also noted thousands of beds have been built across the country. He said with nationwide cases daily flattening, he was doubtful all would be needed.

He added "we're not getting any calls from governors at this moment" seeking ventilators or other equipment.

"They are in great shape for this surge that's coming in certain areas, in particular," Trump said.

Meanwhile, Detroit, the hardest-hit area of Michigan, on Friday attributed 54 more deaths to the virus and recorded 145 new confirmed cases. The city health department's reporting now brings the total number of cases of the virus in the city to 6,228, and there have been 326 deaths.

The mayor said the overall death total reported Friday reflects cases not only from Thursday but other days spanning back to March 29 due to weeks of delays. Still, the 39 reported dead since Thursday is the highest the city has seen.

Seven of the newest deaths, Duggan added, were individuals from nursing homes.

The newest confirmed cases the mayor reiterated Friday is that the lower number is due to backups, not a lessened infection rate.

A temporary field hospital inside the TCF Center downtown is accepting its first patients Friday and preparing to care for up to 250 COVID-19 patients there by the end of next week.

The TCF Regional Care Center, formerly Cobo Hall, is taking in up to 25 patients Friday and another 25 on Saturday as it brings on staffing to care for up to 200 more in the next week, said Michelle Grinnell, a spokeswoman for the Michigan Economic Development Corp.

"Our process and procedures ensure that we have safe and adequate staffing to support the patients accepted at TCF Regional Care Center," Grinnell said in an email.

"In the immediate term, this includes federal support from a FEMA Public Health Team and operational support from Henry Ford Health System and McLaren Health Care, with additional support being onboarded early next week."

The center will be staffed through a partnership involving Henry Ford Health System, McLaren Health Care, Beaumont Health and the Detroit Medical Center. It's expected to have up to 1,000 beds to help with hospital overflow.

The facility will receive patients from southeast Michigan hospitals at least 48 hours after those individuals are admitted as inpatients at one of the acute-care facilities, according to the governor's office. The center will not accept patients by ambulance or walk-up. And it will not have an intensive care unit area or provide care to patients who need ventilation.

Duggan said that patients will be moving into the center to offload the stress at some of the region's most crowded hospitals.

On Thursday, Detroit reported 249 new cases of COVID-19 — the fewest recorded in a 24-hour span in days — yet Duggan cautioned that the figure was due to a testing backlog and had "nothing to do with the infection rate going down."

Detroit is conducting nearly a third of the overall tests for the virus in Michigan. A regional testing site at the old Michigan State Fairgrounds does not operate on Sundays and there's a four-day turnaround for results, resulting in a dip in the number of positive cases reported on Thursday, the city noted.

The mayor said the daily totals being reported out serve as a "report card on the lab capacity," but "has absolutely nothing to do with the spread of the virus within this community."

The city reported a spike of 588 new cases and 38 deaths on Sunday. On Monday, the new daily number of confirmed cases was 475 and Tuesday, there were 469 new cases of the virus confirmed.

Duggan has said the city expects it will be doing 1,000 tests per day at the fairgrounds on Monday. U.S. Rep. Brenda Lawrence, D-Southfield, helped the city secure $100,000 and a commitment for 10,000 more kits from Hyundai Motor America to further boost the testing capability there.

Hyundai's donation is part of an ongoing program by the automaker to support testing throughout the country. Overall, Hyundai has donated $4 million to help with testing at 21 institutions and provided kits to cover 50,000 tests.

The city also is among the first in the country to secure rapid testing equipment from Illinois-based Abbott Laboratories. Those kits have allowed for police, fire and other essential workers to be quickly screened for the virus daily.

The city is now dedicating 50% of all the 15-minute test kits to nursing home staff and residents as well as homeless individuals.

cferretti@detroitnews.com

Read or Share this story: https://www.detroitnews.com/story/news/local/detroit-city/2020/04/10/detroit-has-6-228-covid-19-cases-326-deaths/5129626002/