On top of that, the state shut down schools, so my children are at home. Luckily, I don’t have to worry about child care, like many other workers. My youngest daughter can stay home with her sister, who’s 17. Or, I can take her with me while I make deliveries. But my children got free breakfast and lunch at school, and now we have to go there to pick up a food sack during lunchtime — right when I should be making deliveries.

In Seattle, leaders have taken some helpful steps. They’ve stopped electricity and water shut-offs and announced a moratorium on evictions for tenants who can’t make rent. That’s good, because the weather has gotten really cold. We don’t need to add to our homeless population — and gig workers who are losing incomes would be among the first to lose their home.

While the governor expanded eligibility for paid leave and unemployment insurance for regular employees, this should extend to gig workers who are classified as independent contractors. We need emergency income support too. I can’t get unemployment benefits if I lose work because of the coronavirus. There are so many unknowns for us, and I need to know I’ll still have an income if everything shuts down, or if someone in my family gets sick.

But that can’t happen. I can’t self-quarantine because not working is not an option. If I don’t make enough money, I can’t feed my children for the next six weeks. I’m not stopping, fever or no fever. And that’s what most other gig workers would do too, because none of us makes enough money to save up for an emergency like this.

The gig companies should get us through this crisis. We deserve emergency income support so we can stay afloat — and gig workers need minimum pay standards for the long run, so we have something saved before the next crisis comes. That’s why I’ve been working with the Pay Up campaign to pass laws that would protect tips, set a pay floor to ensure we make at least $15 an hour plus the expenses of driving and allow workers to know what they’re getting paid for a job and why.