With no baseball, we’re left to sit around and make lists. Good thing we were already in the beginning stages of ranking our top 20 Rangers prospects for the year. We’ve been unveiling one a day from Monday through Friday over the course of four weeks, based on rankings from Baseball America, MLB Pipeline and our own research.

One annual caveat: It’s impossible to compare prospects evenly. One guy may have a higher floor and a quicker path to the majors, but another may have more risk and upside. It’s all a balancing act. We’d like to think that if we err on any side, it is slightly toward performance.

No. 1: Josh Jung, 3B

How acquired

The Rangers’ top pick (eighth overall) in the 2019 draft out of Texas Tech. He received a $4.4 million signing bonus.

About 2019

One of the reasons the Rangers took Jung, who shared Big 12 Player of the Year honors with Davis Wendzel, so high was his perceived advanced hitting skills. He showed them right off the, uh, bat. After signing quickly, he went to Arizona, homered in his first professional at-bat and generally tore up the Fire League (10 hits, two walks and just three strikeouts in 19 plate appearances) for a week. Then went to Class-A Hickory for the final 40 games and put up a .287/.363/.389/.752 slash line there. He entered 2020 as the No. 55 prospect in baseball, according to MLB Pipeline, and No. 93, according to Baseball America.

Pros

With little production from their top picks in recent years, the Rangers opted for a guy with a higher floor and perhaps a bit less ceiling. Jung, the son of a high school baseball coach, is advanced as a hitter. He’s got a good idea of what he wants to do at the plate and he is disciplined in his approach. And his ceiling, if he reaches it, isn’t bad, either. Perhaps a Josh Donaldson type with a tad bit lesser defense (though still solid) and a much better haircut.

Cons

The biggest question seems to be whether he will be able to pull the ball for power as a pro. The Rangers think he will. If he doesn’t, then there are questions if he’s got enough power to man a corner position. Also, there has been some concern about his overall agility, which might be a way of saying defensively he’s better suited at third than short.

Second opinion

"Josh is an intelligent and highly skilled hitter with big-time drive. In 2019 he got over 500 plate appearances between Texas Tech and his time with the Rangers. Playing that much -- especially when he joined the organization -- was key because it helped Josh recognize focus areas for his first offseason. He invested a ton of time on his own and with our hitting coaches learning how to properly pull the ball and continue his growth as a multi-dimensional hitter.” — Rangers assistant general manager for player development Mike Daly.

The Rangers’ top 20 prospects

No. 20: SS Chris Seise

No. 19: RHP Demarcus Evans

No. 18: RHP Tyler Phillips

No. 17: SS Luisangel Acuña

No. 16: C David Garcia

No. 15: SS Osleivis Basabe

No. 14: 3B Davis Wendzel

No. 13: RHP Jonathan Hernandez

No. 12: INF Anderson Tejeda

No. 11: RHP Ronny Henriquez

No. 10: LHP Joe Palumbo

No. 9: RHP Hans Crouse

No. 8: SS Maximo Acosta

No. 7: 3B Sherten Apostel

No. 6: RHP Ricky Vanasco

No. 5: RHP Cole Winn

No. 4: INF-OF Nick Solak

No. 3: CF Leody Taveras

No. 2: C Sam Huff

No. 1: 3B Josh Jung

Find more Rangers stories from The Dallas Morning News here.