With no baseball, we’re left to sit around and make lists. Good thing we were already in the beginning stages of ranking our top 20 Rangers prospects for the year. We’ve been unveiling one a day from Monday through Friday over the course of four weeks, based on rankings from Baseball America, MLB Pipeline and our own research.

One annual caveat: It’s impossible to compare prospects evenly. One guy may have a higher floor and a quicker path to the majors, but another may have more risk and upside. It’s all a balancing act. We’d like to think that if we err on any side, it is slightly toward performance.

No. 2: Sam Huff, C

How acquired

The Rangers’ seventh-round pick in the 2016 draft out of Arcadia High School in Phoenix. He received a slightly over-slot bonus of $225,000. Huff had a commitment to Grand Canyon University in Arizona.

About 2019

Huff, 22, was the organization’s big mover last year. He began the season not even among the top 10 prospects but burst onto the scene with big power numbers in his second season at Class-A Hickory. He earned a May promotion to advanced Class-A Down East, won the MVP at the All-Star Futures Game in July with a big homer and finished with 28 total homers. He entered 2020 as the No. 73 prospect in the minors, according to MLB Pipeline, and No. 99, according to Baseball America.

Pros

He has two big-time tools that leap off the paper and grab your attention – big-time power and arm strength. That could translate to a pretty special catcher. The power speaks for itself. As a receiver, he’s still a work in progress, but he did make significant improvements last year and the plan this year was to pair him with former big league catcher Bobby Wilson, who is now the manager at Double-A Frisco.

Cons

At 6-5, 240 pounds, he’d be one of the biggest regular catchers ever. His power plays on the plus side as a catcher, but would it be as big a tool at, say, first base, where Huff played some last year. Matt Wieters, at 6-5, 235 pounds, might be the closest in build to Huff. He was once one of the top prospects in baseball but never hit more than 23 homers in a season. As with most power hitters, there are strikeout questions. He struck out 154 times in 475 at-bats last year and walked just 33 times. The strike zone command must improve.

Second opinion

“As long as there aren’t electric umps, Huff scares me because he is a well-below-average receiver. They didn’t do him any favors by only catching him half the time last year. He’s a good, not elite, thrower and won’t hit for average or have a high on-base percentage, so there are a lot of questions outside of the power.” — AL scout.

The Rangers’ top 20 prospects

No. 20: SS Chris Seise

No. 19: RHP Demarcus Evans

No. 18: RHP Tyler Phillips

No. 17: SS Luisangel Acuña

No. 16: C David Garcia

No. 15: SS Osleivis Basabe

No. 14: 3B Davis Wendzel

No. 13: RHP Jonathan Hernandez

No. 12: INF Anderson Tejeda

No. 11: RHP Ronny Henriquez

No. 10: LHP Joe Palumbo

No. 9: RHP Hans Crouse

No. 8: SS Maximo Acosta

No. 7: 3B Sherten Apostel

No. 6: RHP Ricky Vanasco

No. 5: RHP Cole Winn

No. 4: INF-OF Nick Solak

No. 3: CF Leody Taveras

No. 2: C Sam Huff

No. 1: 3B Josh Jung

Find more Rangers stories from The Dallas Morning News here.