Updated at 12:45 p.m.: Revised to include updated data from the Small Business Administration.

WASHINGTON — As shelter-in-place orders took hold in Texas and across the U.S. amid the coronavirus outbreak, Richardson jeweler Kathleen Pampillonia knew almost instantly what an extended economic slowdown would mean for the 55 workers at her family-owned business.

Furloughs — no getting around it.

So her relief was almost overwhelming when she received approval this month for a forgivable loan through the “paycheck protection program” Congress created to ensure that small businesses can keep employees on the payroll through the COVID-19 crisis. Hundreds of thousands of dollars arrived in the business’ bank account a few days later, staving off the feared cuts.

“You’ve got all of these families’ lives in your hands,” Pampillonia said. “It’s a big responsibility.”

Tens of thousands of Texas firms like Pampillonia’s have already been approved for what amounts to tens of billions of dollars in assistance, reflecting the extraordinary demand for financial help as the ongoing public health crisis has crippled the economy.

But others remain in jeopardy, particularly after the $349 billion loan program on Thursday ran out of money amid congressional gridlock over the next steps in the coronavirus response.

Democratic leadership has blocked the GOP’s plan to add $250 billion to the account, countering that the small business relief should be paired with a significant infusion for hospitals and state and local governments. Republicans, in turn, have blocked the Democrats’ proposal.

While the political bickering continues — and the loan program sits idle until a deal is reached — small businesses in North Texas and beyond are trying to avoid going under.

Some have received the OK for a loan, but the money hasn’t arrived. Some are still awaiting a bank’s decision. Some have only received a smaller disbursement from another federal loan program. Some are simply unsure how to proceed, other than to hang on.

“I’ve hit roadblock after roadblock,” said Wendy Fisher, owner of Dallas-based Good Day Pet Sitters, which was informed Friday that its $50,000 loan wasn’t approved before the fund ran out. “Now I’m just trying to formulate a plan based on the assumption that I’m not getting anything.”

Small businesses, including many nonprofits, are particularly vulnerable in times of economic turmoil.

They, unlike many large corporations, often lack the kind of reserves to weather a downturn, much less the severe one that’s gripping the nation. They are also less likely to have the ability to lobby lawmakers in Washington for financial assistance.

So it was significant that Congress included in a $2.2 trillion relief bill a couple of provisions designed to help small businesses deal with coronavirus-fueled economic destruction.

Lawmakers expanded an existing economic injury disaster loan program administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration, pitching it as a way for businesses to get a quick injection of cash to hold them over until more substantial financial aid arrives.

They also created the paycheck protection program to serve as that more robust lifeline.

How it works

Firms with 500 or fewer employees can apply for a loan to cover eight weeks of payroll, rent and utilities. The loans are low-interest and, significantly, they will be forgiven if employee head counts and compensation levels are maintained throughout that time period.

“I’m just thankful that it’s there,” said Amy Spawn, CEO of The Warren Center, a Richardson nonprofit that works with special needs kids.

Businesses have flooded the system with loan requests, which are made with a financial institution and then processed through to the federal government. More than 1.6 million loans were approved in less than two weeks, draining the $349 billion fund with ease, per the SBA.

Texas is home to some of the most activity.

More than 134,000 paycheck protection program loans had been approved in the Lone Star State through Monday, according to the SBA. Those agreements totaled more than $28.4 billion — more than any other state besides California.

There’s no secret behind the immense demand, which comes as customers hunker down at home and some businesses see their revenue plummet.

Take Logotology, a Richardson apparel and promotional products company. Owner Monica Scott said the company’s revenue is 30% of what it expected to bring in this month. That’s because many of its contracts are tied to special events — all which have been canceled for the spring.

The company has cut some workers’ hours and made up some lost revenue by starting to produce protective face masks, she said. Without approval of the $115,000 loan, Logotology would’ve only been able to last so long before it was forced to pursue significant layoffs.

“I’m the last one who would’ve ever expected to say that the government was going to help me,” said Scott, who learned that her loan had been approved just before the fund ran out. “But it’s really the only way we can foresee us being able to survive.”

Waiting for help

Those sorts of brutal payroll decisions can have ripple effects, too.

At The Warren Center, revenue has also taken a dramatic hit. But to lay off employees would mean that special needs kids wouldn’t be able to get help at a particularly challenging time. So staff members are using telehealth to still see about 70% of the children they serve, Spawn said.

The center recently got approval for a loan totaling just under $1 million, meaning the nonprofit’s 90 employees — and their clients — should be in the clear. Spawn, as of midweek, was still anxious.

“Until I have that money in the bank, I’m not really cheering yet,” said Spawn, who’s leaned on resources such as the Richardson Chamber of Commerce, the Collin Small Business Development Center and the North Texas nonprofit community.

Other business owners in Texas and beyond report similar trepidation, particularly as the paycheck protection program and the SBA’s expanded economic injury disaster loan program experienced clunky rollouts that were further strained by the tremendous response.

Time is of the essence for businesses, with success sometimes hinging on factors as simple as having a bank with a preexisting relationship with the SBA.

That reality rang through on a Zoom meeting that Rep. Colin Allred, D-Dallas, hosted this week with local business owners to work through potential issues. One person after another asked when they might expect a loan decision or, even better, a disbursement.

Then came Congress’ failure on Thursday to replenish the paycheck protection program fund.

“It’s extremely frustrating,” said Kiyundra Gulley, president of the Oak Cliff Chamber of Commerce. “A lot of our businesses have yet to even hear from their financial institutions after applying for the dollars, only to now hear that the money is gone.”

The partisan standoff has produced the usual political sniping, with Republicans and Democrats blaming the other side for not budging. But there does appear to be bipartisan agreement over the need to provide more money for small businesses — and soon.

Allred, for instance, urged Congress to bolster the programs “as soon as possible to ensure that small businesses who need help can get it.” Texas Sen. John Cornyn, chiding Democrats for a “lack of urgency,” stressed his “hope … that we can get that done without further wasted time.”

Some small operations, which are also seeking help through the state, are bracing for more challenges ahead.

Laurie Garvie is executive director of the Richardson Symphony Orchestra, which has seen its revenue fall off as concerts and special events have been canceled. She secured a $4,000 advance from the SBA, but is still waiting on a $25,000 paycheck protection loan for her small staff.

Those funds, pending approval of the bigger loan, should carry the orchestra through the next couple of months.

But she’s already thinking about life after the shelter-in-place orders go away. Will enough people feel comfortable enough, even then, to pack into a music hall or outdoor concert space? If not, then what?

“Nobody knows what’s gonna happen,” Garvie said.