Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump inflames red state-blue state coronavirus divide Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (I-Vt.) send out a fundraising solicitation Friday on behalf of the Democratic National Committee (DNC), the latest sign he's seeking to bring his supporters behind the party's presumptive nominee, Joe Biden Joe BidenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move GOP online donor platform expanded to state level Overnight Energy: US oil prices hit 18-year-low | Green groups, coal companies attack EPA power plant rollback from both sides | EPA weighs lifting ethanol requirements for oil refiners MORE.

Sanders, who suspended his presidential campaign last week and later endorsed the former vice president, said he will do everything in his power to help defeat President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE in November and touted the DNC’s work to elect Democrats up and down the ballot.

“My campaign for president may be over, but our struggle continues. That struggle begins with defeating Donald Trump, the most dangerous president in modern American history, but it does not end there. I will also be doing everything in my power to elect strong progressives at every level of government,” Sanders wrote. “That is why I am about to ask you to join me by making a donation to the Democratic Unity Fund today.”

ADVERTISEMENT

The statement was particularly notable given the bitterness between Sanders and the DNC during the 2016 presidential race, when many Sanders supporters believed the national party was seeking to help Democrat Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump inflames red state-blue state coronavirus divide Sanders sends fundraising email for DNC MORE win the nomination.

While some progressives have maintained their skepticism of the party establishment, Sanders repeatedly vowed throughout the campaign he’d support the party and the ultimate Democratic nominee in the race against Trump.

“Make a $7 contribution to the Democratic Unity Fund today to show your commitment to party unity by helping elect Democrats nationwide,” Sanders concluded his email. “Whatever you are able to give will help us all win in November.”