More than 34,000 people with the coronavirus have now died in the United States, according to a New York Times database, a figure that is frequently increasing by more than 2,000 per day.

Confirmed cases in the United States Total cases Total deaths Per capita case s cases death s deaths Total reported cases per 100,000 people +10 +100 +200 No cases reported Double-click to zoom into the map. Use two fingers to pan and zoom. Tap for details. Note: The map shows the known locations of coronavirus cases by county. For total cases and deaths: Circles are sized by the number of people there who have tested positive, which may differ from where they contracted the illness. For per capita: Parts of a county with a population density of less than 10 people per square mile are not shaded. Sources: State and local health agencies and hospitals.

Download county-level data for coronavirus cases in the United States from The New York Times on GitHub.

The high number of deaths comes as hospitals across the country seek scarce protective gear and as political leaders weigh how to reopen parts of the economy. With the outbreak expected to persist, Americans have been told to wear face coverings in public, refrigerated trucks have supplemented morgues and many summer concerts and festivals have already been cancelled.

As of Saturday evening, at least 726,800 people across every state, plus Washington, D.C., and four U.S. territories, have tested positive for the virus, according to a New York Times database.

The outbreak in this country, which now has the highest number of known cases in the world, has exploded over the last six weeks. At the start of March, with extremely limited testing available, only 70 cases had been reported in the United States, most of them tied to overseas travel. Over the last two weeks, more than 1,000 deaths have been announced each day.

Where cases are rising fastest Cases currently doubling every ... 3 days 5 days 7 days Fewer than 20 cases No cases reported Double-click to zoom into the map. Use two fingers to pan and zoom. Tap for details.

See our live coverage of the coronavirus outbreak for the latest news.

As the number of known cases reached into the hundreds, then the thousands, then the hundreds of thousands, life all over the country has changed in profound ways. Malls, salons and dine-in restaurants have been forced to close or risk police action. High school proms, college graduations and professional sports have been cancelled or postponed. Many states have told people arriving from elsewhere to quarantine themselves. And even as politicians began planning to partially reopen parts of the country, they have warned that the pause on communal life could last weeks more, and that the return to work and school would come in stages.

New reported cases by day in the United States 0 10,000 20,000 30,000 cases Feb. 26 Apr. 17 7-day average New cases

New reported deaths by day in the United States 0 1,000 2,000 deaths Feb. 26 Apr. 17 7-day average New deaths

The New York Times is engaged in a comprehensive effort to track the details of every coronavirus case in the United States, collecting information from federal, state and local officials around the clock. The numbers in this article are being updated several times a day based on the latest information our journalists are gathering from around the country. The Times has made that data public in hopes of helping researchers and policymakers as they seek to slow the pandemic and prevent future ones.

See our maps tracking the coronavirus outbreak around the world.

New York: 236,000 cases have been identified.

No state has been hit harder than New York, which accounts for about one-third of the country’s coronavirus-related deaths and where new cases continue to be reported each day by the thousands. With hospitals stretched thin and medical equipment in short supply, the state has turned to Oregon and China for emergency shipments of ventilators. A suburban city in Indiana contributed testing supplies.

Hot spots: Counties with the highest number of cases per resident County Cases Per 100,000 People Slower Faster Rockland, N.Y. 9,171 2,833 Feb. 26 Apr. 17 Westchester, N.Y. 23,179 2,393 Nassau, N.Y. 29,180 2,151 Blaine, Idaho 469 2,132 Randolph, Ga. 141 1,990 Suffolk, N.Y. 26,143 1,757 Orange, N.Y. 6,267 1,657 Terrell, Ga. 146 1,648 Union, N.J. 8,959 1,620 Early, Ga. 165 1,595 Show all Note: Table includes the top counties with at least 20 reported cases when adjusted for population.

People with the virus have died in more than 30 New York counties, including more than 700 victims each in Nassau, Suffolk and Westchester Counties. But New York City has fared the worst, with thousands of known cases and hundreds of deaths in each borough. The city’s mayor, Bill de Blasio, compared the pandemic to “many Katrinas.” A Manhattan convention center began accepting patients. A Navy hospital ship was docked in the city. Field hospitals were set up in Central Park and at a cathedral.

Even as new hospitalizations in the state slowed and the period of explosive, day-over-day growth in case numbers seemed to be ending, familiar routines remained a distant vision. Schools in New York City will not reopen this academic year. Businesses remain shuttered. The state announced that marriages could be performed by video conferencing.

“Hospitalization numbers are down. Emergency rooms are less crowded. Intubations are down,” Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said Saturday. “But it's not over yet. We must keep doing what we're doing.”

Both Mr. Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York City said a reopening of the economy would be contingent on better testing capacity. “We NEED large scale coronavirus testing to get back to a semblance of normal,” the mayor said on Twitter. “We can't do this alone — Washington needs to take action.”

Though New York has had by far the most cases, other Northeastern states have also seen their case totals increase rapidly. New Jersey has the second-highest number of known cases in the country. In Massachusetts, more than 1,900 new cases and 156 new deaths were announced on Saturday. In Connecticut, more than 1,000 people have died, more than double the total from a week ago.

See how the rate of deaths has changed over time in different states and countries.

In America’s nursing homes, outbreaks surge.

Across the country, a pattern has played out with tragic consistency: Someone gets sick in a nursing home. Soon, several residents and employees have the coronavirus. The New York Times has identified more than 4,100 nursing homes and other long-term care facilities across the United States with coronavirus cases. More than 36,500 residents and staff members at those facilities have contracted the virus, and more than 7,000 have died.

Older people and those with underlying health problems are most vulnerable to Covid-19, making the consequences of a nursing home outbreak especially devastating. At least 43 deaths have been linked to an outbreak at the Life Care nursing facility in Kirkland, Wash. Many of the victims were in their 80s or 90s. At least 46 people have died from the virus at the Canterbury Rehabilitation & Healthcare Center, a nursing facility in Richmond, Va.

The New York Times is tracking the coronavirus at nursing homes and long-term care centers. Do you or a family member live or work in one of these facilities? If so, we’d like to hear from you.

In New Orleans and Fort Lauderdale, Fla., multiple deaths have been tied to senior centers. In Wisconsin, the National Guard was sent to a long-term care facility where patients died. Similar outbreaks have been reported in Georgia, in Illinois and a facility in Andover, N.J., where at least 26 deaths have been linked to the virus and where dozens of other residents have died in recent days.

“This disease creates the potential for a perfect storm in a long-term care facility — large groups of vulnerable people living together and a highly transmissible virus that may not cause symptoms in those who care for them,” said Dr. Daniel Rusyniak, the chief medical officer for Indiana’s state social services agency.

Though many of the first coronavirus cases in the United States were tied to overseas travel, localized outbreaks have become increasingly common. New clusters in nursing homes and other settings, including a convent in Indiana and a wind energy facility in North Dakota, are emerging each day.

Times journalists have for weeks tracked clusters of cases and deaths across the country. The largest such outbreaks include a meatpacking plant in South Dakota, an aircraft carrier docked in Guam, a jail in Chicago and a prison in Michigan. The deadliest outbreaks have been in nursing homes and other long-term care facilities.

Cases Connected To Cases Smithfield Foods meatpacking plant — Sioux Falls, S.D. 733 Aboard the U.S.S. Theodore Roosevelt — Guam 669 Parnall Correctional Facility — Jackson, Mich. 225 Stateville Correctional Center — Crest Hill, Ill. 188 Soldiers' Home — Holyoke, Mass. 179 Tyson Foods meatpacking plant — Columbus Junction, Iowa 166 PruittHealth Palmyra nursing home — Albany, Ga. 151 Leavitt Family Jewish Home nursing home — Longmeadow, Mass. 136 Cummins State Prison — Grady, Ark. 129 Canterbury Rehabilitation and Healthcare Center — Henrico, Va. 128 Show all

Some agencies and facilities have refused to release the numbers of cases or deaths. More than 1,000 cases attributed to the coronavirus have been reported among employees and inmates of New York City’s 10 jails. The deaths of two inmates and seven Department of Correction staff are also suspected of having been caused by the virus. Jason Kersten, a spokesman for the New York City Department of Correction, has declined to specify how many cases were associated with each jail.

Detroit and Chicago confront thousands of cases

Urban and suburban areas across much of the Midwest, largely spared by the first weeks of the virus’s spread in America, have faced rising infection numbers and sobering death totals in recent days.

“We are now up to 572 deaths in basically five weeks in this city,” Mayor Mike Duggan of Detroit said Friday. But he said there were signs things were stabilizing, including reduced need for ventilators and a 1,000-bed temporary hospital where only 21 patients were being treated. “Those 979 empty beds are because the people of this city have taken this so seriously.”

Across the Midwest, cities were ailing. Nearly 200 deaths have been tied to the virus in the county that includes Indianapolis. At least 122 deaths and 2,000 cases have been reported in Milwaukee County, Wis. And in Chicago, where at least 491 people have died, there are more than 12,000 cases, a lakefront convention center has been prepared to accept patients if hospitals reach capacity. On both Thursday and Saturday, Illinois officials reported 125 additional deaths across the state, the highest numbers of any day of the pandemic.

“We are starting to see some flattening” in the number of new cases “but still definitely have a long way to go,” said Dr. Allison Arwady, Chicago’s public health commissioner.

Black Americans face worse health outcomes

Across much of the country, African-Americans have been infected with the coronavirus at disproportionate rates.

In Louisiana, where about one-third of residents are black, nearly 60 percent of coronavirus patients were African-American. In Michigan, where less than 15 percent of residents are black, about 40 percent of those who died from the virus have been. And in Illinois, where white people outnumber African-American residents by a rate of four to one, more black people have died from the virus than any other racial group.

“We know the cause: centuries of health disparities fostered by systemic divestment in community health,” Representative Robin Kelly, Democrat of Illinois, said on Twitter.

In Minnesota, disparities were less obvious, with black people overrepresented in total cases but underrepresented as a percentage of deaths.

But a full national picture of the racial impact was clouded by uneven reporting across states and counties. In many places, racial data for a large percentage of patients was unavailable, potentially skewing results. Other states provided no racial data.

In California, where early reports suggested that the impact of the virus was spread at roughly proportional rates across racial groups, state officials issued a statement on Wednesday saying that black people were being hit harder there, too.

“As information on race and ethnicity is becoming more complete on reported deaths,” the California Department of Public Health said, “our data shows that African Americans/Blacks represent a disproportionately higher number of deaths compared to their representation in California’s population.”

Police departments face an invisible threat

While workers in many industries have stopped going to the office, police officers have continued their daily patrols, even in the hardest-hit areas.

“For first responders, you just don’t often have the opportunity to isolate,” said Dermot F. Shea, the police commissioner in New York City, whose department has lost two civilian workers and a detective to the coronavirus.

As the outbreak has grown, so, too, has the number of officers infected with the coronavirus in cities like Detroit, where at least two police employees have died from the virus, many more have been infected and others have been told to self-isolate.

“When we were first starting to quarantine members of our department, it was the absolute right thing to do — I know it saved some lives,” Chief James Craig of the Detroit police said Thursday when he returned to work after recovering from the coronavirus.

The effect on law enforcement officers has been widespread. In Aurora, Ill., the police chief was infected with the virus. In Bainbridge Island, Wash., an officer died after contracting the virus. In New Jersey, several hundred police officers and state troopers have tested positive. So have more than 100 police officers in Nassau County, N.Y., and at least 299 more in Chicago, where Sgt. Cliff Martin was the city's second officer to die from the virus.

“I had the opportunity to speak with Sergeant Martin’s widow, and even in her grief, she said that her husband would want his death to serve as a warning to civilians that they must stay home,” Mayor Lori Lightfoot said.

Louisiana: Deaths and cases continue to grow

At the start of March, with large outbreaks already reported on both coasts, officials in Louisiana had not yet identified a single case of the coronavirus. But in the weeks since, the state has been pummeled. At least 23,000 Louisianans have been infected and at least 1,200 have died.

On Saturday, officials announced 54 additional deaths and more than 400 new cases. A model released by the state in recent days suggested that Louisiana was making progress in flattening its curve of infections, but that the outbreak could continue for most of 2020.

“While these planning projections show our healthcare system may not be overwhelmed, they also show that we are not out of the woods,” said Alex Billioux, an assistant secretary of the state’s public health department.

In New Orleans, which accounts for more than one-quarter of Louisiana’s cases, Mayor LaToya Cantrell urged residents to obey social distancing orders.

“Lord knows New Orleans has been through hell and high water,” Ms. Cantrell said on Twitter, “but this is different. You can spread the virus without even knowing you are sick. That’s why staying home is so important.”

Across the country, hundreds of counties are reporting cases of the illness. Here is a list of cases Times journalists have collected. Cases in New York City and Kansas City, Mo., both of which span several counties, are grouped together.

Outbreaks in jails and prison prove hard to contain

At the county jail in Chicago, more than 600 cases involving inmates and staff members have been tied to the virus, including three deaths. In South Dakota, several inmates escaped from a women’s prison after someone there tested positive. In the federal system, at least 784 inmates and prison workers across the country have tested positive for the virus. In state prisons, that figure is more than 4,000, including more than 30 deaths.

At least 21 federal inmates with the virus have died. So have corrections officers and local jail inmates in more than a dozen states.

The New York Times has spoken with more than three dozen workers and inmates in the federal Bureau of Prisons who have said that federal prisons are ill-prepared for a coronavirus outbreak. Many lack basic supplies, like masks, hand sanitizer and soap. Workers have complained that inmates are still being moved from prison to prison.

"It shows a lack of concern for the welfare of inmates, staff and their families," said Jose Rojas, an official in the prison workers' union and a teacher at the Coleman prison complex in Sumterville, Fla., where coronavirus cases have begun to emerge. The bureau, he said, is "putting us in danger."

In some hard-hit places, glimmers of hope

Across the country, reports of new cases and deaths continue to pour in and new hot spots continue to emerge. But there have been signs that the period of explosive, unchecked spread of Covid-19 might be slowing in some places.

In New York, the governor has predicted that the worst is over. In San Francisco, the rate of new infections has been fairly level, with an average of a few dozen each day since March 22. And in King County, Wash., which includes Seattle, there are also signs that infection rates could be leveling off. After exponential growth early in the pandemic, the daily number of new cases has hovered between 100 and 270 for three weeks.

Even with hundreds of new cases and dozens of new deaths being announced statewide most days, Washington’s prognosis has improved to the point that Gov. Jay Inslee redirected hundreds of ventilators from his state to places like New York that faced a more dire situation. And earlier this month, he announced that an Army field hospital erected next to Seattle’s CenturyLink Field would be removed.

“These soldiers uprooted their lives to help Washingtonians when we needed them most,” Mr. Inslee said. “Since then, it’s become apparent that other states need them more than we do.”