Retail is almost back in business in Texas.

The doors aren’t open yet, but stores that have been temporarily closed in Texas since mid-March can legally offer remote shopping starting April 24. Employees are required to wear face coverings, work at least six feet apart and must be screened for symptoms before entering the building.

Gov. Greg Abbott on Friday outlined a first step to someday opening closed stores with a warning that they should follow the precautions already in place to minimize the spread of the coronavirus.

Abbott branded the limited operations “retail to go.”

It’s basically delivery and curbside pickup, services that grocery retailers and department stores and other retailers have offered as part of their e-commerce operations in recent years.

Apparel, shoes, accessories, beauty, jewelry, home goods, gifts, toys and books were deemed nonessential as shelter-in-place orders were designed to keep people at home. Much of the industry tiptoed around the rules, trying to keep a little revenue coming in behind their temporarily closed doors.

The pandemic has been difficult for big and small retailers that don’t sell essential items such as food, pet supplies and medicine. It was also confusing to employees and customers who assumed that certain stores would or wouldn’t be open. Office supply, electronics and hardware stores were open because the government said they support working and schooling from home.

Some retailers complained that Walmart, Target, Best Buy, Home Depot, Costco, H-E-B and other essential retailers could be open and sell nonessential merchandise while they were forced to cease all operations.

Officials warned that only stores that sell essential goods could stay open, but major U.S. retailers never really stopped selling online, and enforcement was nearly impossible. Online shopping has been the only source of revenue for closed stores. It’s also a way to phase in the reopening of the economy.

Shelter-in-place rules nationwide also demonstrated a lack of understanding about how retail works in 2020. Much of the fulfillment of online orders is done from stores, not warehouses.

Gov. Abbott’s step is "a way to get some more people back to work and for retailers to keep their employees,” said Terry Montesi, CEO of Trademark Property Co., which operates Galleria Dallas. The North Dallas mall won’t be opening next weekend, but a few more of its stores may start offering curbside pickup.

“Hey, ‘we’re starting to get back to business’ is better than "when will this end?' ” Montesi said. “It’s going to happen gradually, and only the virus and the data know.”

Nordstrom has been providing curbside for most of the pandemic from its local stores. J.C. Penney has been working on adding curbside to some stores and will offer it next week in Texas, a spokeswoman said.

Joann offered curbside pickup after the craft stores were closed by Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins. Michaels has been offering local delivery throughout the temporary shutdown. Best Buy, which has been allowed to be open under the essential rules, has operated curbside at its stores. So have the Container Store and GameStop.

When retailers are allowed to open their stores again, analysts believe weaker locations in the chains will remain closed. Smaller businesses and companies that were already in serious trouble may not reopen at all.

Here are the rules from the state:

All payments should be done over the phone or internet if possible, and contact should be minimized if remote payment is not available.

Purchased items should be delivered by the employee to the back seat or trunk of the customer’s vehicle whenever possible to minimize physical contact.

Employees must wash or sanitize their hands after each interaction with a customer. Whenever possible, they must disinfect any item that came into contact with the customer.

For delivery, payments are same as above. The person making the delivery has to leave the package at the customer’s doorstep and can’t enter the house or business.

By mail operates the way it does now with payment online.

One more reminder from Abbott’s published guidelines: “The customer should wash or sanitize their hands after the transaction.”

Twitter: @MariaHalkias

Looking for more retail coverage? Click here to read all retail news and updates. Click here to subscribe to D-FW Retail and more newsletters from The Dallas Morning News.