Updated 7:49 p.m.: Revised to include three new cases in Rockwall County.

Dallas County health officials reported a record 134 new positive cases of the novel coronavirus on Saturday, as well as five more deaths.

The county’s previous daily high was 124, reported Friday. The county has now recorded 2,324 total cases and 60 deaths.

The five new deaths include two men and a woman in their 70s who were residents of a long-term care facility in Dallas, county officials said, providing no further details about where the three lived. The two other deaths were of a Grand Prairie man in his 80s and a University Park woman in her 90s.

All five patients had been critically ill in area hospitals, county health officials said.

“Today’s five deaths bring our weekly fatalities to 33, which is the deadliest week so far and 55% of all COVID19 deaths in Dallas County,” Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins said in a prepared statement. “ … This is why we must limit unnecessary trips, wear a cloth covering at essential businesses and continue making good personal responsibility decisions. It is also why we must listen to public health officials as leaders contemplate loosening safety orders. #StayHomeSavesLives and #FlattenTheCurve.”

The county said most cases requiring hospitalization have been either in people over 60 or in people who have at least one known high-risk chronic health condition. About a third of all hospitalized patients have had diabetes, the county said.

The county provides demographic breakdowns of its coronavirus cases on Tuesdays and Fridays.

Tarrant County

Tarrant County reported three more COVID-19 deaths Saturday, as well as 54 new positive cases.

The county’s most recent deaths include a Mansfield woman in her 70s, a Keller woman in her 70s and a Fort Worth Woman in her 60s. Two of the women had known underlying health conditions, county health officials said.

“Every loss of life is painful to report, and our condolences go out to the families of these residents,” Vinny Taneja, the county’s public health director, said in a written statement.

The county has now recorded 38 deaths related to the disease. The additional positive COVID-19 cases bring the county’s total to 1,229.

Of all cases in Tarrant County, 37% percent have required hospitalization and 188 people have recovered, health officials said. Forty percent of patients have been ages 45-64, 35% have been ages 25-44, and 18% have been 65 and older.

Denton County

A Carrollton resident in his 70s is the 16th death linked to COVID-19, county officials said Saturday. The man had been hospitalized, officials said, but no other information was released.

Denton County also reported seven new cases Saturday, bringing its total to 592. Of those, 328 are still active and 248 are recoveries.

Collin County

Collin County reported one additional death Saturday, bringing its total to 13. No other information about the death was released.

The county also reported one new positive case of the new coronavirus, for a total of 522. Of all cases, 187 are still active while 322 patients have recovered, officials said.

Rockwall County

Rockwall County reported three additional cases of COVID-19. One is a resident in his or her 30s and two are in their 60s.

The most recent cases bring the county’s total to 44.