CLOSE

Signs while traveling to Navajo Nation Tribal community has been struck by the coronavirus pandemic. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

The Navajo Nation has officially extended its 57-hour weekend curfews during the two remaining weekends of April, requiring residents to stay home and some essential businesses to close in an attempt to curb further spread of the new coronavirus, the tribe announced on Thursday.

Aside from essential employees and people with emergencies, Navajo Nation residents are ordered to stay home between 8 p.m. on April 17 and 5 a.m. on April 20, the press release said. The same curfew would be applied to the weekend of April 24 to April 27, according to the press release.

Additionally, some essential businesses were ordered close or cease operations during the weekend curfews, the press release said. The essential businesses include restaurants, drive-thru food establishments and roadside vendors selling hay or other items, the press release said.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

The closure and cease-operation requirements do not apply to health care operations, essential government functions and essential infrastructure activities, the press release said. It also does not apply to gas stations and grocery stores that abide by the following requirements:

Gas stations may operate between 7 a.m. and 5 p.m. during the weekend curfews.

Gas stations may have no more than five customers at any time inside retail areas, and no more than one person per family with exception to one accompanying caregiver for an elderly or disabled shopper.

Grocery stores may operate between 7 a.m. and 3 p.m. during the weekend curfews.

No more than 10 customers at a time may be inside a grocery store, and no more than one person per family with exception to one accompanying caregiver for an elderly or disabled shopper.

The gas station and grocery stores were ordered to monitor occupancy limits, maintain social distancing and regularly disinfect all high-touch surfaces and clean retail and employee work areas, the press release said.

The tribe noted that gas stations and grocery stores were being allowed to operate on a limited basis for essential employees and people with emergencies.

Residents could still tend to livestock during the weekend curfews, but were advised to purchase hay and feed ahead of time, according to the press release. They were also not required to remain indoors at all times during the weekend curfews but instructed to limit movement to their home sites, the press release said.

In the first move of its kind in Arizona, the Navajo Nation announced on April 6 its first 57-hour curfew over Easter weekend, an effort tribal officials have since deemed effective. The tribe's first weekend curfew did not require any essential businesses to close.

Navajo Nation President Jonathan Nez first announced the tribe's plans to repeat its 57-hour weekend curfews on Tuesday during a live online town hall. Later that day, he stated in a press release that the tribe was "developing a new order to implement similar curfews for the next three weekends for the entire Navajo Nation."

"The previous 57-hour weekend curfew was effective in keeping people safe at home and we’re optimistic that the upcoming weekend curfews will produce even better results," Nez said in a press release on Thursday. "Everyone needs to plan ahead for the weekend curfews, purchase what you need during the week, but do so in a safe manner."

"The projections are alarming, but the decisions and actions of the public are the biggest factor when it comes to the numbers of positive cases. We’re fighting hard, but it’s very disheartening when we receive reports of large numbers of our own people traveling and crowding stores in border towns," he continued. "Everyone needs to do their part to educate their loved ones and to hold each other accountable if we want to bring down the numbers."

Essential employees exempt from closures during the weekend curfews must show official identification or a letter from their employer. Anyone who violated the tribe's curfew order could be issued citations, including a fine up to $1,000 and 30 days in jail, officials previously announced.

The Navajo Police Department enforced the tribe's first 57-hour curfew by setting up checkpoints in various communities and issuing more than 170 citations to violators. Since March 30, the Navajo Nation has also had a nightly curfew requiring residents to stay home between 8 p.m. and 5 a.m. every day.

As of Wednesday evening, the tribe had 921 known COVID-19 cases and 38 confirmed deaths.

Reach the reporter at chelsea.curtis@arizonarepublic.com or follow her on Twitter @curtis_chels.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona/2020/04/16/navajo-nation-officially-sets-57-hour-curfews-next-two-weekends/5147222002/