It has been a month since Norma Barrientos has seen or spoken to her mother.

Since then, her window into her mother’s world is through phone calls to the staff at Skyline Nursing Center in west Oak Cliff, where officials announced Sunday 30 coronavirus cases have been identified.

“They say she's fine, but down deep inside of me, I know she's not always fine,” Barrientos said Sunday.

Barrientos’ mother, 79-year-old Mary Sifuentes, has lived at Skyline for almost a year and a half. She has dementia and partial blindness, and struggles to walk on her own, Barrientos said.

She fears that her mother and the other residents at the nursing center may be too weak to fight off COVID-19.

“For somebody older, it’s just harder for them to battle what’s coming to them,” she said. “This virus would be so much worse. … I feel like I may never see my mother again if this doesn’t stop.”

Norma Barrientos, 53, poses for a photo at her home in Dallas. Her mother, 79-year-old Mary Sifuentes, is at Skyline Nursing Center in west Oak Cliff, where there has been a coronavirus outbreak. (Ryan Michalesko / Staff Photographer)

Dr. Phil Huang, director of Dallas County’s health department, announced new cases Sunday at several Dallas-area long-term care facilities. Skyline had the most. Huang did not specify whether staff members were among the 30 confirmed cases there.

The nursing center's administrator declined to comment Sunday evening but provided a written statement from the center’s management that said the facility had been aggressively monitoring its staff and residents for signs of the virus.

“We are doing everything we can to ensure we stop the spread of COVID-19, including staying in very close communication with local and state health officials to ensure we are taking all the appropriate steps,” the statement said. “They have been very complimentary of our efforts thus far and had no further recommendations to reduce the risk other than what we are already doing.”

Other long-term care facilities in Dallas County with cases include Monticello West in Oak Lawn, which has had four cases, including one death. Edgemere in North Dallas has a total of 10 cases with two deaths reported, Huang said. The Reserve at Richardson has reported seven cases, and Brentwood Place One in Pleasant Grove has reported 17 cases. St. Joseph Village in Coppell, Westridge nursing home in Lancaster and the Villages of Dallas in east Oak Cliff have each reported one case, Huang said.

Unlike at the Denton State Supported Living Center, where nearly all of the more than 400 residents were tested after the facility’s first cases, Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins said Sunday the county was not proactively testing all residents of long-term care facilities where COVID-19 had been reported.

He said people can get tests through their medical providers, but those tests can take over a week to get back. The county has only a few dozen rapid-results tests per day — which have about a one-day turnaround — that are being used if people want to take their loved ones home from nursing homes.

Even with a negative result, anyone taking a loved one home from a long-term care facility — which Jenkins encouraged last week — will have to stay in quarantine for two weeks.

That’s because “everyone in the nursing home has what we call ‘significant contact,’” Jenkins said.

An aerial view of Skyline Nursing Center in Dallas. (Smiley N. Pool / Staff Photographer)

Skyline was quiet Sunday. Signs on the windows of the lobby said only essential medical personnel would be allowed inside and that there were confirmed cases of COVID-19 there.

A few visitors stopped by to visit loved ones, waving at their windows.

“Tomorrow I'll come back and visit you,” one man told a resident inside.

Barrientos can’t do that — her mother lives on the second floor. The 79-year-old was taken to a hospital about two weeks ago after she developed a cough, Barrientos said. She wasn’t allowed to visit then either because her mother had to stay in isolation.

Norma Barrientos and her mother, Mary Sifuentes. Sifuentes lives at Skyline Nursing Center in west Oak Cliff, where 30 coronavirus cases have been reported. (Provided by Norma Barrientos)

Sifuentes returned to the nursing center about four days later, after she had tested negative for COVID-19.

“I'm just going to keep on praying on it that she stays negative — praying on everybody there at Skyline that they get better, so nobody else gets sick,” Barrientos said.

Barrientos said her mother doesn’t have access to a phone at the nursing center. So Barrientos relies on calls to the facility. She has learned about new cases at Skyline by watching the news, she said.

Staff members have told her that her mother is being kept isolated in her room.

“It's driving me crazy,” she said. “I don't know what's going on with her.”

Barrientos typically visits her mother every weekend. Lately, she has worried about whether her mother is eating enough. She noticed her mother growing thinner over their past visits, Barrientos said.

She said she thought her mother was well-cared-for at Skyline. But about a month ago, her mother was moved from a room on the first floor to one on the second, where Barrientos said the conditions were “disgusting.” The area smelled of urine and soiled clothing, she said.

“It was just awful for my mom to be there because she's so delicate,” she said.

In a 2019 inspection report of the nursing center conducted by Texas Health and Human Services, 22 violations of state standards were cited.

Among the violations, the department noted the center did not provide care in a way that keeps or builds each resident’s dignity and self-respect. In one incident, a resident whose clothing was soiled in urine said he had not been bathed or had his clothes changed on a consistent schedule.

The report also stated that the nursing center did not store or give out food in a safe and clean way, which could “place residents at risk for food contamination and food-borne illness,” the report said.

Other violations listed in the report include failure to ensure well-balanced meals, failure to ensure a resident voluntarily agrees to take a psychoactive drug, and failure to make sure residents who were taking drugs were carefully watched or changing drugs that were causing unwanted side effects.

The center’s administrator declined to comment Sunday on the violations.

Staff writers Nataly Keomoungkhoun, Joseph Hoyt and Sam Blum contributed to this report.