CLOSE At four times its normal volume because of the coronavirus pandemic, the United Food Bank provided families with food at the Mesa Convention Center. Arizona Republic

More than 60 cars were already lined up at the Mesa Convention Center just after 5:30 a.m. Friday.

Offering their weekly drive-thru distribution for families and individuals, United Food Bank in Mesa was expecting 2,500 families to come through the facility between the warehouse's open-to-the-public hours from 7:30 a.m. to noon Friday, said communications director Tyson Nansel.

Nansel said the number of families showing up for the bank's weekly distribution has grown. The first distribution in March drew about 550 families, which then skyrocketed to 1,200 families once Arizona Gov. Doug Ducey declared a state of emergency in the developing coronavirus pandemic on March 11.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

The demand forced United Food Bank out of its regular distribution center in Mesa and into the larger Mesa Convention Center downtown. However, Ducey's declaration also provided the warehouse with much-needed help from the National Guard.

"When we did it for the first time at the convention center, we saw that increase from 1,200 families up to 2,200 families," Nansel said. "That's about 6,000 to 7,000 individuals. This is our fourth Friday here at the convention center and we planned for 2,500 families. ... I just know we're going to get to 10,000 individuals today."

Nansel said a lot of families are remaining inside their vehicles as they are checked in by staff members wearing masks and gloves. On Friday, there were 40 volunteers working to pack and produce the boxes of supplies while 25 members of the National Guard assisted in distribution and helped load each 25-pound box into each vehicle.

"We're seeing families and people saying they lost their jobs and that they're grateful for this food they're getting," Nansel said. "We've seen the same vehicle come through three weeks in a row now."

Nansel added that part of the reason United Food Bank holds its distribution on Fridays is because of schools' growing lack of food for children, especially on weekends. This way, families can "have enough food that could last ... for a week or more, and it's getting food to them on a Friday so they can have food on the weekend," Nansel said.

Still, the increased demand and lack of food drives has caused a shortage on non-perishable items, like peanut butter, canned foods and soups. Nansel said the food bank is asking for food and monetary donations.

"We lost 100% of our corporate volunteer groups and youth church groups," Nansel said. "We were scrambling to get volunteers to come help us and the community of Arizona has been great in answering our call. We lost 20,000 pounds for the month of March in food drives, and it's been the same thing going through April."

"... We're doing what we can, but we're asking for those who can donate to donate food, but a monetary donation helps us stay in operation and purchase food," he added.

Visit the organization's website at unitedfoodbank.org/donate to donate.

Richard Morin covers the Coyotes and Diamondbacks for azcentral sports. He can be reached at rmorin@arizonarepublic.com. Follow him on Twitter @ramorin_azc.

Support local journalism: Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/mesa/2020/04/17/united-food-bank-serving-thousands-families-needs-grow/5154408002/