As you’ve probably noticed by now, Donald Trump has a thing for dictators. While America’s long-standing allies have received nothing but scorn from him for the last two years, the real-estate developer turned president can’t get enough of strongmen whose brutal tactics he’d love nothing more than to adopt in the U.S. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan; Rodrigo Duterte; Vladimir Putin; Mohammed bin Salman—he loves ’em all. But while he’s utterly devoted to Putin for reasons that may soon be revealed, and dotes on M.B.S. to the point that the Saudis were given a free pass on murder by bone saw, there’s one authoritarian who seems to have truly stolen Trump’s heart: Kim Jong Un. After a slightly rocky start, the president of the United States appears to be uniquely obsessed with his North Korean friend, whose correspondence he carries around, and with whom he told supporters he “fell in love.” In fact, Trump is so smitten that whereas other people see a barbaric murderer, he evidently sees a stand-up young man from whom Don Jr. could learn a thi ng or two.

According to new report from CNN, the last time the two leaders met, Trump told Kim that he’d known “plenty of people who’d grown up wealthy and whose families were powerful,” life circumstances that led to them being total f--kups. But Kim, in Trump’s mind, wasn’t one of them. (As a reminder, we’re talking about a guy who runs a country that’s been described as “the world’s biggest open prison camp,” who’s starved his own people to pay for nuclear weapons, and who ordered the execution of his half brother and uncle.)

Trump, of course, has a vested interest in flattering Kim. The two are currently rubbing shoulders in Vietnam, at a summit that no one expects will yield much of anything for the U.S., save for, at best, a “gesture that would help signal that Kim may actually be serious about dismantling [his nuclear] program eventually.” As a leader for whom ass-kissing goes a very long way, Trump presumably expects the strategy to work on his little authoritarian friend. None of which is to say he doesn’t truly believe that Kim is an accomplished dictator people should look up to. Last year, he told reporters how impressed he was with Kim’s ability to “take over a situation like he did at 26 years of age and run it, and run it tough,” and earlier this month he informed his followers that an economic miracle is about to take place in North Korea—one that only he saw coming.

If you would like to receive the Levin Report in your inbox daily, click here to subscribe.

Nothing to see here, just a Republican representative and Trump ally taunting a witness the day before he’s scheduled to testify before Congress

Cohen, Trump’s former fixer, is expected to “offer up a document to lawmakers” during his congressional testimony tomorrow “that he claims will show the president engaged in criminal conduct related to a hush-money payment to porn star Stormy Daniels.“ According to a recent report from The New York Times, Gaetz decided in 2017 that it was his duty to attack the special counsel’s investigation into Trump, a burden he apparently continues to carry in 2019. When asked about his threat against Cohen on Tuesday, the congressman told a reporter from Vox to stay tuned for “fireworks” tomorrow. In an interview with the Daily Beast, Gaetz insisted he was merely “challenging the veracity and character of a witness,” and that “this is what it looks like to compete in the marketplace of ideas,” which is an interesting euphemism for We’re gonna tell everyone about your who-ores.