Last week in the Living Our Faith feature, we asked readers to respond to the question: Are you finding more time for quiet reflection while sheltering in place to prevent the spread of coronavirus? The following are some of the thoughtful responses we received.

This column is part of our ongoing opinion commentary on faith, called Living Our Faith. Find this week’s reader question and get weekly roundups of the project in your email inbox by signing up for the Living Our Faith newsletter.

Meditating to change habits

Yes during this stay at home phase I do have more time for quiet reflection mainly because my commute time to work is saved. Earlier I got bits of time to reflect, but now during the weekend I sit in a closed room for hours in meditation posture and reflect on things going on in my life and my reaction toward it.

For actions that need improvement, I reflect further and note down baby steps to take. The good thing is because of social distancing I am able to practice my improved action on myself and later on my family. I think by the end of the COVID lockdown I will be able to convert them into habit. During quiet reflection time, I am now able to look at long, lingering issues I have to work on.

Hiral Shah, Carrollton

Finding gold nuggets

I’ve decided not to waste a good crisis! Although the extra time at home is not something I would choose on my own, I am aware there are gold nuggets that can be found amongst the fear, anger and anxiety. Time spent meditating, sitting outside and communing with God all are helping my soul, and allowing me the opportunity to determine what is important in my life.

I can easily fill my days with noise, muchness and busyness during the quarantine. There are plenty of distractions in our world. I’ve decided to lean into the unknown and spend more quiet time reflecting on where I want to go from here. This is uncomfortable for me, but I want these days of quarantine to count for some positive changes in my life.

Lisa M. Hancock, Dallas

Finding God in nature

Having been raised in the Unitarian church I have a different perspective on quiet reflection. I find the best place for it is when surrounded by nature.

For Unitarians the relationship between God and a human is personal, as we all have different theology. Church is a place for fellowship. We study what others believe, but we do not try to become uniform in that respect.

One of the things focused on in Sunday’s (4/12) article by Ryan Sanders bothered me. Pretentiousness, in my observation, is regional within Dallas and its suburbs. I find it very infrequently in Oak Cliff and other parts of Dallas south of Interstate 30. As I worked in the northern parts of Dallas County, I found it to be more common. I’m not sure why, but I do think it has to do with personal theology.

Kenneth Mathias, Grand Prairie

Loving the farm life

My wife and I are sequestered at our farm in Blue Ridge, Texas, and have lots of time for quiet thought if we take advantage of the opportunity. There is always lots of work on the farm, but also lots of time for solitude and tending to our souls. Thank you for reminding us!

Glenn Snyder, Richardson

Time to enjoy spring

I hear/read all these stories about how sad people are that they can’t gather and worship their God. I really don’t understand. Just look out the window and see the spring leaves on the trees, the beautiful grass.

Birds hopping and singing, squirrels playing and all the other things that nature (God) provides.

This is a time to pause and enjoy. Soon enough we will be back in a hurry and ignoring the beauty of nature that God has provided.

H. Ray Calvert, Irving

Precious time together

Who knew such joy would invade our self-isolation? Neighbors call and bring groceries, friends check on us and bring gifts. I grant you that we are among the fortunate few who are retired and financially secure and have no children at home. I’m learning to cook again and discovering that books I read years ago seem new and more meaningful.

Each day, my husband and I separate to claim our different interests. He likes the computer, I prefer yoga and yard, and then we come together and see each other anew. We are both in our 80s, so this time together is so precious and we don’t want to waste it.

Annette Ferrell, Dallas