Airline plans canceled? Read this about getting refunds Ailing airlines change rules as they try to hoard cash

Be sure you know the difference between a full refund and a flight credit if you face a flight cancellation. Be sure you know the difference between a full refund and a flight credit if you face a flight cancellation. Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Image 1 of / 14 Caption Close Airline plans canceled? Read this about getting refunds 1 / 14 Back to Gallery

If the coronavirus crisis had not wreaked havoc on the world, the travel industry would be on the brink of a very busy and lucrative spring break travel season right now. Travelers everywhere would be taking off to beaches in Mexico or Hawaii, ski vacations in the Rockies, or flying to Amsterdam to see tulips, or to Washington, D.C., to see the cherry blossoms.

Instead, most of us are stuck at home staring at our screens, worried about our health and finances, and trying to figure out how to stem losses around canceled spring break plans.

Here's something important to keep in mind as you wade into these waters.

According to the contracts of carriage that we enter into when buying airline tickets, passengers are entitled to full refunds if the airlines cancel their flights for any reason. This applies to both refundable, non-refundable, and even the cheapest basic economy tickets.

The rule is spelled out clearly on the Department of Transportation website. It states: "If your flight is cancelled and you choose to cancel your trip as a result, you are entitled to a refund for the unused transportation – even for non-refundable tickets. You are also entitled to a refund for any bag fee that you paid, and any extras you may have purchased, such as a seat assignment." Similar rules are in effect for European flights, too.

But it appears cash-strapped airlines are chipping away at that rule, and trying to persuade customers to take credits (not refunds) for future flights as compensation for cancellations.

When they cancel flights, many airlines are now sending emails to passengers saying something along the lines of: "We regret to inform you that your flight to X has been canceled. In these uncertain times, we are simplifying the rebooking process for canceled flights. You may retain the value of your ticket as a credit to be used for a future flight within a year." These emails don't mention that a full refund is one of your options.

Ummm, a flight credit only valid within a certain timeframe is not a full refund.

My advice: Don't take the bait if you don't want to. If the airline cancels your flight and can't re-accommodate you in a reasonable amount of time, you are entitled to a full refund, and you need to ask for it on the spot – call, email or tweet your request to the airline, or find the refunds page on its website. If you cancel your flight, you have to take whatever the airline offers, typically a credit for a future flight. Most airlines have waived change or cancellation fees for near-future flights due to the current crisis. (SEE BELOW FOR A SAMPLE EMAIL TO SEND TO AIRLINES)

Don't miss a shred of important travel news! Sign up for our FREE bi-weekly email fare and news alerts.

If you are a frequent traveler and know that you'll be back in the air when the current crisis passes, a flight credit is likely just fine – especially if change penalties are waived. But if you you travel infrequently, or simply want the flexibility of cash in your pocket, a full refund is an option.

Also, keep an eye out for incentives from airlines that would rather have you accept a credit instead of a refund. Some, like SWISS, are offering a flat $50 bonus added to your flight credit. Frontier Airlines is offering a $50 sweetener. There's also word that American is offering 20 percent bonuses for those accepting credits over refunds.

United and JetBlue recently amended their refund policy to only allow flight credits instead of refunds, which is pushing already nervous travelers away from booking their flights. It helps preserve United's cash, but it could have longer term effects according to Brett Snyder, editor of The Cranky Flier blog, who wrote, "The Department of Transportation says if your flight is canceled, you can get a refund. United says… nah. I expect that United is going to find itself in trouble here. This isn’t a time to be angering governmental agencies, since it’s the government that is likely the only hope United has of getting through this crisis intact." For the time being, United says that it will offer a refund only if it can't find an alternate flight within six hours of the canceled flight. More about that here.

"United is certainly the worst, most pugnacious offender, but Delta, BA and lots of other airlines are trying to game this," said Joe Brancatelli, editor of the popular JoeSentMe.com business travel blog, and one of many experts sounding off about airline moves to skirt long established rules around refunds.

If you find getting your refund for an airline-canceled flight is impossible, take the matter up with the credit card company that you used to purchase the ticket. Dispute the charge for services not rendered, and let the bank fight for the refund on your behalf. However, even that option is moving into a gray area. According to the Live and Let's Fly blog, American Express is refusing to dispute refunds for canceled Air France flights in the current environment. So the issue still appears to be open.

Brancatelli says that what we see happening in France won't happen in the US because of our Fair Credit Billing Act, adding: "If you want to help readers/viewers, tell them IN BIG LETTERS: Credit cards WILL process refunds.. Airline rules and DOT boilerplate are irrelevant now. Tell them to go FIRST to their card and contest charge."

Strategy: In the current environment, don't rush to cancel your spring break flights now. Wait until the very last minute to see whether the airline will cancel your flight before you do. That way you can ask for a refund. If you cancel before the airline does, you'll only get a flight credit.

"As this airline crisis deepens, we may see more and more airlines resorting to those methods. Sure, airlines need money. But so do Americans right now. And most importantly, airlines are breaking the law by not giving it to you after canceling a flight," wrote Kyle Potter on the Thrifty Traveler blog.

SAMPLE LETTER TO AIRLINES:

Here's a good form letter you can use to contact the airline-- fill in the blanks with your personal situation, flight and card info:





Dear (INSERT AIRLINE NAME)

I am/was scheduled to depart (INSERT DATE) from/to (INSERT CITY PAIR) on (INSERT AIRLINE). My confirmation number is (INSERT AIRLINE CONFIRMATION NUMBER).

I purchased this ticket for (INSERT AMOUNT) and charged it to my (INSERT CREDIT CARD COMPANY) card.

(INSERT AIRLINE) informed me on (INSERT DATE) that my flights were canceled and offered me a credit for a future flight.

I am writing to refuse this credit and request a full refund instead.

According to the Department of Transportation, when an airline cancels a flight, passengers are entitled to receive a refund for the full amount of the ticket price, plus additional fees.

I am requesting a refund in the amount of (INSERT AMOUNT) to be placed on the (INSERT CREDIT CARD) I used to purchase this ticket.

I am looking forward to receiving this refund soon. If I do not hear back from (INSERT AIRLINE) within two weeks, I plan to dispute this charge with the credit card company.

Sincerely,

(INSERT YOUR NAME, EMAIL AND PHONE NUMBER)

Read all recent TravelSkills posts here

Chris McGinnis is SFGATE's senior travel correspondent. You can reach him via email or follow him on Twitter or Facebook. Don't miss a shred of important travel news by signing up for his FREE biweekly email updates!

SFGATE participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites.