CLOSE About 6.5 million pounds of beef is being recalled by Arizona-based meat producer JBS Tolleson, INC. Veuer's Natasha Abellard has the story.

A logo sign outside of a facility occupied by JBS USA in Tolleson on Feb. 4, 2018. (Photo: Kristoffer Tripplaar/Sipa USA via AP)

The Arizona Department of Health Services confirmed that 21 cases of illnesses in Arizonans are linked to an outbreak of salmonella in raw beef products from a local meat processing plant.

The raw beef products, which were recalled earlier this month, are from JBS Tolleson, Inc., the ADHS said in a news release.

JBS Tolleson Inc. has expanded the scope of the recall to include nearly 7 million pounds of raw beef products packaged on various dates from July 26 to Sept. 7.

The state health services department urges Arizonans to double-check meat in their freezers for the number “EST. 267” inside the USDA mark of inspection.

Showcase/Walmart, Cedar River Farms, Comnor Perfect Choice, Gourmet Burger, and Grass Run Farms Natural all sold the contaminated beef.

State health officials also encourages people to thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water prior to eating or preparing food.

Cooking ground beef to an internal temperature of 160 degrees Fahrenheit (71.1 degrees Celsius) will destroy harmful bacteria in it.

A Kentucky woman on Oct. 5 filed the first lawsuit against Arizona-based JBS Tolleson and JBS USA after the company's multimillion-pound beef recall.

READ MORE:

CLOSE Most people take precautions to avoid contracting salmonella poisoning from raw chicken, but there are other foods that are surprisingly more likely to harbor the harmful bacteria. Leafy green vegetables such as lettuce, kale, and spinach are actually the biggest carriers of salmonella. According to the FDA, eggs, even clean, uncracked ones, can contain salmonella with "79,000 cases of foodborne illness and 30 deaths each year caused by eating eggs contaminated with Salmonella." Sprouts, melons, and raw milk are other foods that commonly carry the bacteria as well.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/southwest-valley/2018/10/23/21-arizonans-sick-after-salmonella-linked-jbs-tolleson-beef-recall/1739313002/