CLOSE

Passengers stepping off their flights at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport are being greeted by new signs propped around the concourse.

The signs inform travelers about Gov. Doug Ducey's executive order requiring people arriving from the New York City area to immediately self-quarantine for 14 days or face a $2,500 fine.

The order, announced on April 7 and implemented at 12:01 a.m. April 9, puts the Arizona Department of Health Services in charge of notifying passengers arriving from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut that they must quarantine for 14 days upon entering Arizona.

But the order came with no notice to the airport or airlines and without the Federal Aviation Administration recommended 48 hours' notice to stakeholders, Phoenix officials say. Hours before it took effect, it was still unclear how it would work.

Sky Harbor referred all questions about the order to DHS. On April 9, DHS posted guidance on its website for travelers returning from the region.

MORE THINGS TO DO: For restaurant reviews, travel tips, concert picks and more, subscribe to azcentral.com.

"Passengers will get an email prior to boarding the flights with information about what they will be expected to do," Chris Minnick, a spokesperson for the department, said when reached by email.

Before Ducey's order was announced, American and Southwest airlines already had been sending emails reminding passengers to check travel restrictions and quarantines at their destinations.

Beyond informing travelers of the order, DHS did not indicate on its website that it plans to take any additional enforcement or monitoring measures. The Arizona Republic has reached out to the department for comment.

Other states with travel restrictions

Arizona joins other states issuing travel quarantines, all with different approaches to enforcing them.

Florida, Hawaii and Alaska were the first states to implement quarantine orders. Alaska requires arriving passengers to fill out a form designating where they are quarantining. In Montana, the National Guard is taking temperatures of passengers at the airport and train stations.

It's unclear how many people Arizona's order will affect.

First, it exempts airline personnel, military members and health care workers.

Second, the number of people flying right now is very low. According to Airlines for America, the trade group that represents the airline industry in the United States, passenger traffic has fallen by 96%.

Most airlines have cut their schedules and planes that are flying are not full. American, Delta, United and Frontier all have suspended flights between New York City airports and Sky Harbor. Only JetBlue and Southwest still have flights listed as departing from Phoenix. One flight from each of those airlines was scheduled on Sky Harbor's website to arrive on April 9.

Tucson does not offer nonstop flights to the New York City area.

You can connect with Arizona Republic Consumer Travel Reporter Melissa Yeager at melissa.yeager@azcentral.com. You can also follow her on Twitter and Instagram.

Support local journalism like this story by subscribing today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/travel/airlines/2020/04/09/ducey-travel-order-quarantine-new-york-new-jersey-connecticut-travelers-new-phoenix-airport-signs/5125085002/