BOSTON — David Sidoo, a businessman from Vancouver who played in the Canadian Football League in the 1980s, admitted Friday to paying bribes totaling $200,000 to have someone secretly take the SAT exam for his sons to inflate their test scores.

In Boston federal court, Sidoo pleaded guilty to a single count of wire fraud conspiracy in a deal with federal prosecutors rather than go to trial Jan. 11, 2021.

He's the 22nd parent of 53 defendants charged in the blockbuster "Varsity Blues" case to plead guilty to paying bribes to Rick Singer, a college consultant who was the mastermind of a nationwide scheme college admissions scheme.

"I’m pleading guilty to paying Mr. Singer to have two tests taken for my sons," Sidoo told U.S. District Judge Nathaniel Gorton, who will review a pre-sentencing report before deciding whether to accept the plea.

More:A year later, prosecutors are winning historic college admissions case, but fight isn't over

Prosecutors recommended three months of prison time for Sidoo, a fine of $250,000 and one year of supervised release. The government dropped an earlier money laundering charge. His sentencing is set for July 15.

Sidoo, 60, is the former CEO of Advantage Lithium, a Canadian-based mining company, which replaced him after his arrest last year. Amid the cheating scandal, he also left his position as president and CEO of East West Petroleum, based in Vancouver.

Siddo played defensive back in the CFL from 1983 to 1988, first for the Saskatchewan Roughriders then BC Lions. He then entered the brokerage business and became a partner at Yorkton Securities. He was one of the founding shareholders of American Oil & Gas, which was sold to the Hess Corporation in 2010.

More:College admissions scandal tracker: Who's pleaded guilty, who's gone to prison — and who's still fighting

Assistant U.S. Attorney Eric Rosen said Sidoo paid Singer $100,000 to have Mark Riddell, a private high school counselor from Florida, take the SAT in place of Sidoo's older son in Vancouver. He scored a 1670 out of 2400.

A year later, Sidoo paid Singer an additional $100,000 to have Singer take the SAT in Los Angeles for his younger son, scoring a 2280 out of 2400. Sidoo told Singer his younger son would need a high score.

More:As college admissions scandal turns 1, a look at the tough judge Lori Loughlin, other parents will face

Sidoo's plea came on the one-year anniversary of the Justice Department announcing the historic case – the largest admissions scandal in U.S. history.

Singer, who pleaded guilty the day the case was revealed, worked as a college consultant in Newport Beach, California. He took payments from wealthy parents to either fix their children's college admissions exam scores or tag them as fake recruits to slide them into prestigious universities.

Sidoo's plea means one fewer parent, now 14, is headed for trial. It begins Oct. 5. with a group of parents accused of bribing their children's way into the University of Southern California. Six other parents go to trial in January.

Reach Joey Garrison and on Twitter @joeygarrison.