British singer Sam Smith says he does not “identify” as a male or female, but a “mixture of all different things.”

Appearing on actress Jameela Jamil’s Instagram-sponsored show “I Weigh Interviews,” Smith, who has previously come out as “nonbinary,” elaborated on his identity and revealed that he once contemplated having a sex-change operation.

“I’m not male or female,” he told Jamil, as reported by Complex. “I think I float somewhere in between.”

“When I saw the word non-binary/genderqueer and I read into it and I heard these people speaking, I was like, ‘f***, that is me,’” he explained. “Non-binary/genderqueer is that you do not identify in a gender. You are a mixture of all different things. You are your own special creation. That’s how I take it—I am not male or female. I think I float somewhere in between — it’s all on the spectrum.”

“I’ve always been very free in terms of thinking about my sexuality,” added the singer, “so I’ve just tried to change that into my thoughts on gender as well.” Smith said he will “think like a woman sometimes.”

As noted by Complex, the Grammy winner said he had liposuction at age 12 because of his large “breasts” and previously contemplated having a sex-change operation. Smith now says a sex-change operation is not for him.

According to Entertainment Weekly, the musical talent has a preference for the male “he” and “him” pronouns when being addressed, unlike some other “nonbinary” folks who opt for “they” and “them” pronouns, The Hill reports.

Smith came out as a gay man to the public in 2014, and in 2017, the star told The Sunday Times that he feels “just as much woman” as he does “a man.”

“I love a heel,” Smith said, according to Rolling Stone. “I’ve got loads of heels at home. … People don’t know this, but when I was 17, I remember becoming obsessed with Boy George and Marilyn, and all that. There was one moment in my life where I didn’t own a piece of male clothing, really. I would wear full make-up every day in school, eyelashes, leggings with Dr. Martens and huge fur coats – for two and a half years.”

“I don’t know what the title would be, but I feel just as much woman as I am man,” he added.

Others in Hollywood have come out as “nonbinary” or “genderfluid,” too, in recent years.

For example, pop-singer Miley Cyrus told Billboard in 2017 about her “nonbinary” tendencies. “Miley told Billboard that she often thinks about her gender identity, saying that she doesn’t really identify as a boy or a girl. While she said her looks vacillates between somewhat masculine and super femme, defying expectations for how girls are ‘supposed’ to dress, Miley said her gender identity also exists outside the binary,” reported Teen Vogue.

“I think about being a girl all the time,” said Cyrus. “I’m always like, ‘It’s weird that I’m a girl, because I just don’t feel like a girl, and I don’t feel like a boy.'”

WATCH: