In its continuing assault on reproductive rights, the Trump administration has issued potentially devastating changes to the nation’s nearly 50-year-old family planning program, Title X, which allows millions of women each year to afford contraception, cancer screenings and other critical health services.

Health clinics have long been barred from using Title X money, or any federal funds, to pay for abortions, but they have been able to provide abortions and other family planning services under one roof. Under the new rule, unveiled last week by the Department of Health and Human Services after being floated last year, a clinic that provides abortions will have to jump through an absurd series of hoops to continue receiving Title X funding. For instance, it will have to create a separate entrance to the facility for patients seeking abortions, hire separate personnel and establish a separate electronic health records system. Title X facilities will also be barred from referring patients for abortions . The rule gives discretion to the department to decide on a case-by-case basis whether facilities are in compliance.

This will sound familiar to anyone who has followed the proliferation of state anti-abortion laws over the past decade. Some of those laws have required abortion clinics to widen their hallways, revamp janitor’s closets and make other expensive changes that had little to do with their patients’ well-being. This latest move comes from the same playbook: impose unnecessary regulations for reproductive health clinics to impede women’s access to care.

The bad news doesn’t stop there. The new Title X rule also removes the longstanding requirement that health care providers inform pregnant patients about their full range of options — prenatal care, termination, adoption. Critics of the rule worry that this will open the door to participation in the program by groups that are opposed to abortion or that emphasize abstinence over contraceptive use. The department acknowledges in the rule that it would allow funds to go to “entities that offer a single method [of family planning] or limited methods — including providers that might do so for reasons of conscience.”