'It has not been enough': Bay Area parents on first week of distance learning Moms, dads describe wildly different virtual classroom experiences

Leanne Francis, first grade teacher at Harvey Milk Civil Rights Academy, conducts an online class from her living room on March 20, 2020 in San Francisco, California. With schools closed across the United States due to the COVID19 pandemic, teachers are holding some classes for students online. less Leanne Francis, first grade teacher at Harvey Milk Civil Rights Academy, conducts an online class from her living room on March 20, 2020 in San Francisco, California. With schools closed across the United ... more Photo: Justin Sullivan, Getty Images Photo: Justin Sullivan, Getty Images Image 1 of / 9 Caption Close 'It has not been enough': Bay Area parents on first week of distance learning 1 / 9 Back to Gallery

For more coverage, visit our complete coronavirus section here.

With no end in sight for the spread of the coronavirus pandemic, schools across the Bay Area shuttered last Monday — including San Francisco’s 113 public schools — leaving Bay Area parents, teachers and students to try their hands at distance learning.

So how’d the first full week of virtual classrooms go? Well, we decided to find out.

Over the last week we polled parents and kids from pre-K to high school in a mix of both private and public schools in every county in the Bay Area — and while this is far from a full snapshot of every school and experience, it was nonetheless incredibly revealing. Based on this sample, Bay Area experiences with “school-from-home” can best be described as… uneven.

Distance learning began as early as March 11 for Bowman International Montessori, a private school in Palo Alto, and as late as March 19 for Gardner Bullis in the Los Altos School District and Prospect Sierra, a private school in El Cerrito.

The approaches to distance learning from educators were wildly varying, from "optional" assignments sent home by teachers, to full-on, daily Google Classroom interactions with teachers, to Guidepost Montessori in San Francisco's 'AltSchool' — a proprietary platform that students had been using for online submissions and feedback well before the coronavirus was even part of our lives (hello, preparedness). Other tools used by educators included: Canvas, Flipgrid, Edpuzzle, Zoom, Google Chat, email, PowerSchool, Google Hangouts, text books, Mobymax and RenWeb.

San Francisco Unified School District, for one, leaned as far as you could on the “optional” side of the scale, leaving some parents unhappy.

“Parents, including myself, are incredibly frustrated with the district's lack of leadership in providing our children with adequate distance learning opportunities,” said Shanna Abeloff, who has a sixth and eighth grader at Rooftop School in San Francisco.

Abeloff pointed to the school’s website which states, “No teacher can require students to do school work at this time,” and a video posted on the SFUSD Twitter account featuring Superintendent Vincent Matthews saying “Many people are at different places, some people want learning to continue and urgently need it, and others are at a place where they’re just saying ‘I just need to get me and our family together.’”

And while the district has been hugely successful with free school lunch distribution and also planned to work with families who need to borrow computers from the district starting Wednesday, everyday distance learning has been harder to come by — and sometimes completely absent, according to at least one parent.

”We are also incredibly frustrated with Rooftop's lack of leadership in this arena as well. Our principals have not required our teachers to provide consistent, constructive work for our kids. The learning experiences have varied from class to class and teacher to teacher,” Abeloff said. “Principals should be providing clear direction and support for teachers to educate our kids at a time when kids are looking for structure and education.”

Several parents in SFUSD and elsewhere have turned to free online learning tools like Khan Academy and/or reasonably priced ones like Outschool (as low as $5 a class) as days have gone by with little distance learning guidance from some schools.

“We are fortunate enough that my wife and I both [work from home] but it is still a challenge to juggle being a worker, a parent and now a teacher,” said Kenny Corbett, who has a first and third grader at Peralta Elementary in Oakland Unified School District. “I honestly am unsure how I can keep this up for months.”

Corbett said that there wasn’t any online learning for 1st grade and parents were expected to fill the gap.

Many teachers have managed to stay virtually present for their students, setting up Zoom office hours or regular Zoom gatherings (one teacher in the San Carlos Unified School District hosts a “Breakfast Club” morning Zoom), while others have needed more time to get up and running.

"We got nothing the first two days at all, and by Wednesday they were doing 30 minutes of Zoom in the morning with homework assignments. It has not been enough to keep my son busy — he needs help with his school work, which I can't always give him doing a full-time job. Working from home is really hard with an 8-year-old home indefinitely,” says Dabney Lawless, who has a third grader in the East Bay. “I have been using Outschool.com to keep him busy. He has taken 10 classes this week. I have also signed him up for some clubs on the platform for fun too like a chess club and Minecraft discussion group."

San Jose Unified School District, in particular, has lagged, dealing with a diverse population and access to technology for Santa Clara County’s largest school district. Superintendent Nancy Albarran sent a letter to parents that stated, “There is no online solution that is appropriate for students in advanced placement courses, students in foster care, English learners, and students with special needs, among our many student populations.” And continued saying SJUSD was in the process of preparing long-term educational experiences and would share those “as soon as possible.” “Suggested” schedules are posted on the district website for entire ranges of grades (TK-5, 6-8, 9-12) that point parents to things like Khan Academy, and distance learning is just getting underway this week — a week-plus after the closure.

And while most parents said there were no pros to remote learning (“none,” “not really,” “no”), some found silver linings — in particular the children.

“It’s good to stay home so that we don’t get sick,” said Samantha Horny, a 6-year-old at St. Matthews Catholic Elementary School in San Mateo.

On Wednesday, six Bay Area counties extended that “stay home” to May 1 — leaving most kids out of school for seven weeks since the shelter-in-place was issued. It was a tough pill to swallow for a lot of parents who all came to the same realizations over the past week: “It requires a lot of parent involvement,” said Heidi Mayon, who has a kindergartener and third grader in Los Altos Unified School District. “Turns out the teacher is a key part of the school.”

Grant Marek is the Editorial Director of SFGATE. Email: grant.marek@sfgate.com | Twitter: @grant_marek

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

Sign up for 'The Daily' newsletter for the latest on coronavirus here.