CLOSE

A collective of migrant advocacy groups urged U.S. Border Patrol officials to stop enforcement activities at "sensitive sites" during the pandemic. (Photo: Rafael Carranza/The Republic)

TUCSON -- A collective of 21 migrant advocacy groups in southern Arizona urged U.S. Border Patrol officials in the state to stop enforcement activities at hospitals and other "sensitive sites" during the COVID-19 pandemic, arguing their presence could deter undocumented migrants from seeking vital services.

But Border Patrol officials in Arizona disputed those claims. The agency said they're not carrying out enforcement work in sensitive locations. They accused these groups of creating "unnecessary panic."

"This is our normal operational posture and it has not changed. Any person or organization inferring differently is creating an unnecessary panic," the agency said in a statement. "The Border Patrol is focused at the border in an effort to deter and prevent illegal entries and further limit COVID-19 exposure and spread."

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

The 21 organizations, led by the American Civil Liberties Union of Arizona, sent a letter this week to Roy Villareal, the chief patrol agent for Border Patrol's Tucson Sector, which covers Pima, Santa Cruz and Cochise counties.

The groups cited reports of the "presence of Border Patrol ... at hospitals that are providing free drive-thru testing for community members" in Tucson.

Marcela Taracena, the communications director for the ACLU, said those actions could have a "chilling effect" on undocumented and mixed status families living in southern Arizona.

"It's just really important for them to assure community members that (Border Patrol) won't be at essential services locations," she said. "Because they know that this is a very difficult time for many, and we don't want to deter particular folks from seeking help, or going to the grocery store, or getting their medications."

Villareal published his own letter on Friday to address the concerns detailed by the 21 migrant advocacy groups.

Nearly 4,000 times last year, the U.S. Border Patrol sought medical assistance for those in our care. No one should be deterred from seeking medical care due to fear. Read my full response to the ACLU here. #HonorFirstpic.twitter.com/WEyZMAPC9k — Roy D. Villareal (@USBPChiefTCA) April 17, 2020

He said a 2013 memo from Customs and Border Protection remains in effect. It urges agents to avoid enforcement operations in hospitals and health care centers "except in the most extraordinary of circumstances," he wrote.

"Observing a Border Patrol agent at a local hospital should not be perceived as an enforcement action," Villareal wrote. "Observing a Border Patrol agent or vehicle is no different than seeing other law enforcement entities at hospitals with person in custody in need of medical attention."

The Tucson Sector said border agents transported migrants in need of medical care to hospitals in southern Arizona a total of 88 times during the month of March, and more than 4,000 times last year.

Villareal said 18 agents also sought care at area hospitals in March for injuries they sustained while out on the field patrolling the border. He added that immigrants shouldn't avoid seeking care at medical facilities out of fear of getting detained by agents.

"It really misses the mark for them to say that their presence doesn't have an effect," Taracena said in response.

Border Patrol needs to be clear and transparent about their enforcement activities during the pandemic and mindful of the optics, for example, of having patrol vehicles visibly parked near entrances to hospitals or other sensitive sites, such as testing centers or other businesses deemed "essential" by state authorities, she said.

"They have to know that if they're vehicle is out front of the hospital right next to the testing site, and there might be a mom and a dad who are not documented, in line to get tested, that individual might be deterred from seeking help," she said.

Have any news tips or story ideas about the U.S.-Mexico border? Reach the reporter at rafael.carranza@arizonarepublic.com, or follow him on Twitter at @RafaelCarranza.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/border-issues/2020/04/17/groups-border-patrol-stop-enforcement-hospitals/5156499002/