The Killers have just been invited to perform in the “One World: Together at Home” broadcast, the band announced on Twitter.

Breaking News! We’ve been invited to perform in the One World: #TogetherAtHome broadcast. We accepted and it will conflict with our planned Instagram Live Q&A, so would you mind if we moved the Live Q&A to next Friday at 12 PST? We knew you’d understand. You guys are the best. — The Killers (@thekillers) April 17, 2020

Hosted by Jimmy Fallon, Jimmy Kimmel and Stephen Colbert, the concert lineup Saturday night includes big-name artists like Lady Gaga, Lizzo, Billie Eilish, Stevie Wonder, Elton John and Paul McCartney, the Deseret News previously reported.

The concert will be broadcast live on major networks in the U.S. (NBC, ABC, CBS) on April 18 at 8 p.m. ET, and be available for streaming on most social media platforms.

The Killers’ participation in “One World: Together at Home” means the band is pushing back its live Instagram concert and Q&A originally scheduled for this afternoon at 1 p.m. MT. Instead, the band announced on Twitter that it would hold the concert on April 24 at 1 p.m. MT.

“Attention self incarcerated humans of earth. Time to get wild!” the band tweeted on April 11. “Watch and listen on your favorite hand held device as we answer your questions and play a few of our songs for YOU, LIVE ON INSTAGRAM!”

Attention self incarcerated humans of earth. Time to get wild! Next Saturday at 12PM PST, watch and listen on your favorite hand held device as we answer your questions and play a few of our songs for YOU, LIVE ON INSTAGRAM!



Reply to this tweet with your questions. — The Killers (@thekillers) April 11, 2020

The Killers recently released a new single, “Caution” — a track that features a guitar solo from former Fleetwood Mac member Lindsey Buckingham, according to a news release.

“Caution” will be on the band’s upcoming album, “Imploding The Mirage,” which is due out May 29. The record was recorded in Los Angeles, Las Vegas and Park City, Utah — where Killers frontman Brandon Flowers and his family moved in summer 2017.

“Imploding the Mirage” marks the first album to be written and recorded since the Killers left its Las Vegas hometown, according to the release.

As of now, the band is scheduled to perform at Salt Lake City’s Vivint Arena on Aug. 19 in support of that album. Tickets were supposed to go on sale March 20, but the band tweeted a few days before that tickets for its late summer and fall shows would no longer be going on sale that day.

The stadium concerts in the U.K. that were supposed to kick off the tour in May have been postponed to 2021, according to New Music Express.

“The news is changing every hour around coronavirus,” the Killers tweeted on March 16. “Ultimately, we want you, our fans, to stay focused on prevention and remaining safe and cautious right now.”

The musicians added that when tickets do go on sale, a portion will go to local organizations in each city they tour that have been helping people whose jobs have been affected during the pandemic.

“We are taking this personally,” the Killers tweeted. “Both we and our families have had these jobs and our hearts go out to those affected.”