Hashtags are portals to the infinite. Consider how #Travelgram is a window into far-flung lands, a cosmetically filtered catalog that’s sure to cause the slightest pinch of envy. Or how #TBT invites moments of collective nostalgia. Others, like #YouOKsis and #OscarsSoWhite, galvanize the public into action, raising awareness around street harassment or Hollywood’s racial imbalance. The joy of hashtags is that they locate us within the larger digital environments we navigate, and in that way are a kind of lexicon, a communal internet text. In the last decade, as social networks were reframed into battlegrounds for generation-defining movements—Gamergate, Me Too, Black Lives Matter, the Arab Spring—hashtags became cultural shorthand, a genre without depletion.

The belief inherent in many of our heavily used social platforms is that community is at their core, but the real heart of them, on the user end of things, is centered on the individual. The most striking tweets are singular acts—random thoughts, kernels of due outrage, stream of consciousness rants. The truly best Instagram pages prize distinctiveness over programmed conformity. On TikTok, creators strive to stand out, generating content of the mesmeric sort. These can be enriching pursuits, especially online; the tools to make oneself are inexhaustible.

Hashtags work against these fundamental urges. Even in our assorted uniqueness, they group us together, cataloging us under shared languages. There’s a sweet alchemy to that, of course. In a world of fracture, we’re more alike than we’re willing to admit.

In more recent years, though, hashtags have transcended the internet, pollinating pop culture in other surprisingly resonant ways. There’s hashtag rap, for one, a specific style that values the punch line over all else; rappers end “a series of lines each with a single word—as if it were a hashtag—[serving] as an implied wink,” music critic Jon Caramanica noted of the trend in 2013. On TV, the concept of hashtags has found itself more rooted in plays for identity. This specific subgenre attempts to capture how identity is performed on the internet; what is rarely successful is the translation of the performance to the screen. Sometimes the translation is literal; at other times, purely symbolic.

The early seasons of Dear White People felt especially chained to empty symbols. (Its title alone makes plain how it ultimately intends to direct its gaze.) Characters on the Netflix comedy lacked real voice; everyone spoke in Twitterspeak but the problem was that people don't typically talk like they tweet. What Dear White People was trying to do was lampoon whiteness and legitimize blackness, which is the ultimate obsession of hashtag TV—the case for authenticity.

Although its title is an easy grab for what some might consider an authentic black story—black injustice gone viral—the new Quibi series #FreeRayShawn is more than the metaphor its name suggests. It kicks off with a car chase through the vibrant, sun-bathed streets of New Orleans as RayShawn (Stephan James), a former member of the Army’s special forces, is on the run from local law enforcement. The audience is led to believe he shot a cop but as more of the story’s threads unravel, it’s evident that the police aren’t being completely up front about what happened, or that they even care which black person they gun down. A serious inquiry from Lt. Steven Poincy (Laurence Fishburne) about the suspect is met with a frustratingly default response, and one that has likely cut short untold lives of innocent black men: “Black male, 20s, dark clothing.”