Only the best deals on Verge-approved gadgets get the Verge Deals stamp of approval, so if you're looking for a deal on your next gadget or gift from major retailers like Amazon, Walmart, Best Buy, Target, and more, this is the place to be. Vox Media has affiliate partnerships. These do not influence editorial content, though Vox Media may earn commissions for products purchased via affiliate links. For more information, see our ethics policy .

Google has given its Pixel 4 and Pixel 4 XL unlocked phones a big price cut that lasts until May 9th at 11:59PM PT, or until supplies last. Each size and storage configuration is $300 off at the Google Store, Best Buy, and Amazon. Considering that the smaller Pixel 4 usually sells for $799, having it down to $499 for the 64GB version makes taking the plunge a much more reasonable idea if you’re in the market for an upgrade, but don’t want to spend hundreds more on the Samsung Galaxy S20 or even the new OnePlus 8.

Both sizes of the Pixel 4 work with any US carrier, and because it’s unlocked at purchase, you can swap any SIM in. If you use Google Fi, you can take advantage of the phone’s eSIM capability. These devices released in late 2019 and have the Snapdragon 855 processor and 6GB of RAM. Additionally, the Pixel 4 series has a 90Hz refresh rate display, letting your content scroll more smoothly than it would appear on a standard 60Hz display seen in most phones today.

Google may soon introduce the Pixel 4A, a more affordable version of the Pixel 4 that will likely have fewer features. We’ve written at length about it, since rumors have been popping up with greater frequency. The reason why I include it here is because this deal is slightly reminiscent of a deal that Google held last year just ahead of the launch of the Pixel 3A. If the rumors for this year’s Pixel 4A hold true, it may launch at $399, just $100 less than this discounted Pixel 4. For your money, taking advantage of this deal will get you a faster phone that can probably take far better pictures.

Here’s a link to each retailer offering this deal. You’ll be able to customize how much storage you want, the color, and whether you want the $499 Pixel 4 or $599 Pixel 4 XL: