Arizona public officials now release coronavirus data by ZIP code. The data show hot spots of infections near Indian reservations, especially around Page, along with large numbers of cases in Scottsdale and Tucson.

Yet the state excluded much of the information needed to identify locations of outbreaks in the state.

The state Department of Health Services published its data as a map, showing a number of cases for each ZIP code. ZIP codes with more than 10 cases gave a specific number. Those with fewer gave ranges: "0," "1-5" or "6-10."

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coronavirus coverage relating to public safety free of charge. Support The Republic by subscribing to azcentral.com.

The state's map shows every ZIP code with more than 10 cases as red. The team from AZ Data Central extracted the case figures from the state's map, assembling many of the data points by hand.

To give a truer view of the pandemic's impact in Arizona, AZ Data Central's map presents the number of cases relative to the population of each ZIP code.

This map now reflects the number of cases reported by the state as of Friday, April 17.

Because of delays in test results, state health officials say, the data on any given day represents the number of cases four to seven days earlier.

For any ZIP code AZ Data Central could not locate within the state's data, that area is left blank. The population for each ZIP code is derived from American Community Survey population data from 2014 to 2018.

CONTACT US: Are you a patient, or do you know someone who has died? Do you work in a hospital? Share what you know

Not every case comes from the ZIP code shown

The state said its map showed the location of cases based on a patient's home address. However, if a patient's residence is unknown, the case was mapped to the address of the provider or the reporting facility.

It is unclear how many cases were assigned to health care facilities instead of patient addresses within in each ZIP code. The state's map indicates that, generally, more than 90 percent of the cases were mapped to the address of the patient's residence.

A review of ZIP codes with large numbers of cases suggests the data may overstate the impact in ZIP codes with hospitals. For example, the data shows a large number of cases in Phoenix's 85054, home to Mayo Clinic Hospital, and in Tucson's 85714, home to Banner University Medical Center South.

Conversely, it's possible these areas indeed have high rates of infection. Or, it's possible that more people who live in those ZIP codes simply were able to obtain tests for the virus.

MORE: ZIP codes with nursing homes have higher rates of infection

Tribal data missing

The statewide data released Sunday shows Native Americans make up 16% of those who have died from COVID-19, among cases for which race and ethnicity are known.

That suggests Native Americans may be dying at a rate far greater than their presence in the overall population. Yet state officials suppressed testing data from ZIP codes where more than 50% of the population is tribal residents. ADHS's website listed those areas as "tribal approval pending."

The state's case data also doesn't reveal where outbreaks on tribal land may be the greatest, nor does if they stretch beyond the Navajo Nation into other tribal areas in eastern or southern Arizona. But ZIP codes with the highest numbers of cases per capita are adjacent to a reservation, according to the map.