Tucker Carlson, host of “Tucker Carlson Tonight,” poses for photos in a Fox News Channel studio, in New York, Thursday, March 2, 2107. (AP Photo/Richard Drew)

We’ve written extensively here about China’s deliberate misinformation campaign from the start of the Wuhan coronavirus outbreak in their country, how WHO joined in on the deception, and how the mainstream media and Democrats here in the United States fell for it all and picked up on their talking points in an effort to discredit the Trump administration because Orange Man Bad.

But Fox News’s Tucker Carlson did an very detailed segment on his program Friday night that did a really good job untangling the web that China and the World Health Organization weaved from the beginning, how China originally blamed Italian armed forces for bringing the virus to Wuhan, how when that didn’t work they blamed the U.S. military. He also noted that U.S intelligence officials suspected early on that China was lying about the origins of the virus.

Carlson also explained how China’s communist government was successful in getting WHO to rename the virus to “COVID-19” instead of the Wuhan coronavirus (to cover up where it came from), and how the “racism” angle took off from there, with journalists in the American press and Democratic politicians banging the same drum.

Here are some excerpts from the transcript, via The Daily Wire:

So in the face of skepticism at this explanation, the Chinese then blamed Italian armed forces personnel, who it turns out had been near Wuhan a few months before for the military world games – that’s an international sporting event. The Italians must have brought the virus to China, the Chinese said. When the Italian government complained about that, the Chinese shifted the blame to the U.S. military. The American armed services and western tourists must have infected Wuhan, the Chinese said. Meanwhile, as they were saying this, behind-the-scenes Chinese officials were working frantically to destroy relevant evidence of where it actually came from. Doctors and journalists in Wuhan who raised uncomfortable questions about the virus disappeared. Some of them may have been murdered. At one point in January, scientists in Shanghai succeeded in sequencing the DNA from the virus. The information they gathered from that could’ve been crucial to researchers around the world who were trying to understand the virus and develop vaccines against it. In other words, the rest of us.

Watch the full segment below:

Tucker Carlson blasts China for their coronavirus cover up. pic.twitter.com/yfBtxui2dv — (((Jason Rantz))) on KTTH Radio (@jasonrantz) April 18, 2020

Based in North Carolina, Sister Toldjah is a former liberal and a 16+ year writer with an emphasis on media bias, social issues, and the culture wars. Read more by Sister Toldjah