A New Hampshire mother says her son is “traumatized” after a man apparently “triggered” by the 15-year-old’s “Make America Great Again” hat slapped him across the face at a polling site earlier this week.

Patrick Bradley, 34, of Windham, is charged with three counts of simple assault and disorderly conduct for allegedly slapping the teen and assaulting two other adults who tried to intervene at Windham High School, the Windham Police Department said.

The boy’s mother, Cathy Campbell, told Fox News that her son was volunteering at a Trump campaign tent outside of the school, which was a polling station for the state’s Democratic presidential primary on Tuesday.

“I was apprehensive about him wearing the MAGA hat, because we know it can provoke and we know people don’t like Trump,” she said. “But he wore the hat because he’s a proud 15-year-old and he doesn’t know what people are going to be like.

“My son was standing outside on the sidewalk and he said ‘have a nice night,’ he said it to everyone. But this man was triggered,” she continued. “He said ‘f– you’ to him and wound up his hand as fast as he could and slapped him across the face.”

Ms. Campbell said the man also fractured the jaw of another man wearing a “Make America Great Again” hat who tried to stop the attack.

Mr. Bradley was arrested and booked at Rockingham County Jail where he is being held on a $5,000 cash bail, as well as an administrative hold for a probation violation, Fox News reported. He is also accused of throwing Trump campaign signs and attempting to knock over the campaign tent, police said.

Ms. Campbell said her son is “pretty traumatized” from the incident.

“This guy lives in our town. It’s pretty unnerving,” she said, but added that her son has been getting “a lot of support from his peers.”

The incident came just days after 27-year-old Gregory Timm, of Florida, was charged with ramming his van into a Republican Party voter registration tent, later telling police that he doesn’t like the president and wanted to “take a stand.”

“So a leftist attacks 3 Trump supporters, including a 15 year old child, in NH this week,” the president’s son, Donald Trump Jr., tweeted Thursday. “Last week a deranged leftist attempted to run over a group of Trump supporters with a car in FL. What will it take for the MSM to finally call out leftwing violence?”

Soon after calling attention to the violence, Mr. Trump Jr. realized that he and girlfriend Kimberly Guilfoyle had actually met the boy in New Hampshire just before the alleged attack.

“So it turns out that I actually met the 15 year old victim shortly before he was attacked by a sick leftist,” he tweeted. “I asked an aide to find his number & just got off the phone with him & his mother. I thanked them for being such strong supporters. My family has your back Nate!”

Sign up for Daily Newsletters Manage Newsletters

Copyright © 2020 The Washington Times, LLC. Click here for reprint permission.