It's the end of an era for Duke track and field and cross country.

According to a release sent by the team Thursday morning, director of track and field Norm Ogilvie has retired after 30 seasons on the Blue Devil coaching staff. Ogilvie has been the head men's track and head men's cross country coach since 2000 while simultaneously holding the director of track and field position since 2003.

"I am at least humble enough to know that this announcement has small importance in the current big picture, but I feel it is important enough to the Duke community of track and field student-athletes and alums that I explain my reasoning," Ogilvie said in the release. "I have been fortunate enough to stay put at one Division I school long enough to develop a true love for its values, culture and commitment to excellence in all things.

"I've tried to do my part over the last three decades, taking a declining men's team all the way back to the top of the ACC in cross country, taking six Duke cross country teams to the NCAA meet, and also helping to establish Duke University as one of the top women's track and field teams in the ACC on a consistent basis. We have won NCAA individual titles and put multiple Duke athletes on the Olympic team. Not once did we do so compromising the academic mission of one of the world's great institutions of higher learning."

Duke's cross country and track and field programs have both seen major turnarounds under the direction of Ogilvie. In his first season as head men's cross country coach in 2000, Ogilvie led the Blue Devils to their first ACC championship since 1977, winning ACC Coach of the Year in the process. Meanwhile, the men's and women's track and field teams have produced three individual NCAA titles since 2011.

"To be sure, we are deeply appreciative of Norm's dedication and commitment to foster a spirit of collegiality and excellence relative to 'all things' Duke University, notwithstanding, Duke Athletics," director of athletics Kevin White said. "Moreover, we are indeed grateful for Norm's unqualified integrity, and per his unwavering effort to provide the very best possible student-athlete experience. Wishing Norm all the very best in his coaching retirement, as well as per the next chapter."

The release stated that associate head coach Shawn Wilbourn will be named interim head coach for track and field, while assistant coach Rhonda Riley will be named interim head coach for cross country. The extended search for Ogilvie's permanent replacement will begin at a later date due to coronavirus precautions.