The IRS answered many more questions about economic impact payments Friday, including a new set of FAQs about its Get My Payment web portal that premiered Wednesday and has many taxpayers perplexed.

I’ll answer some additional questions below, including what to do if a deceased relative gets a payment. But people looking for answers should first check out these expanded FAQs.

• For information about the payments overall, such as am I eligible, how much will I get and how, go to bit.ly/stimpay.

• For information about Get My Payment, go to https://bit.ly/irspay2020. This app is for people who are required to file a 2019 or 2018 tax return. They can use it to track the status of their payment. They can also use it to enter their bank account information, if they didn’t put it on their return, for direct deposit of the payment. Many people who tried the app have been asking why they get the notice “payment status not available.” The expanded FAQ attempts to answer this and other questions.

• To see if you should use Get My Payment or a different Web tool called “Non-Filers: enter payment info here,” go to https://bit.ly/paytule, where you will find a side-by-side comparison. The latter app is for people who don’t file a tax return and don’t get Social Security retirement, disability (SSDI), Supplemental Security Income (SSI) or survivor benefits, Railroad Retirement benefits or (as of Friday) veterans’ compensation and pension benefits. Non-filers who don’t get those benefits can enter their information in that app to get a payment.

Now for some other questions.

Q: “My mother died in early 2018. The IRS officially knows she is deceased. However, today a $1,200 deposit was made in her name into a checking account, which she used, and to which a tax refund was directly deposited in 2019. My name is also on the account. What should I do? My intent is to leave the money untouched until the federal government recognizes and addresses this obvious error.”

A: There have been many reports of money going into bank accounts of people who died in 2018 or 2019. The IRS and Senate Finance Committee said they are looking into this issue. Some experts say the deceased, or their heirs, are entitled to these payments; some are not so sure.

The payment is technically a credit against your 2020 taxes. To be eligible, you need a Social Security number valid for work, can’t be claimed as someone’s dependent, and don’t exceed income limits.

But rather than send payments out next year when people file their 2020 taxes, Congress agreed to pay them this year based on your 2019 tax return or, if it hasn’t been filed, your 2018 return. (People who are eligible for the payment but didn’t file a return can still get it.)

People who were not eligible for the payment based on their 2019 or 2018 tax return, but are eligible this year, can claim it when they file their 2020 return.

What if the opposite is true? The Senate Finance Committee said in an FAQ, “if the credit amount you qualify (for) based on 2020 income is less than what you qualify for based on your 2019 tax return, it does not have to be paid back.”

Congress knew or should have known about this issue because when the government sent out stimulus payments in 2008, some went to deceased people. Congress could have made deceased people ineligible for the payment, but they didn’t, said Nina Olson, who was the IRS national taxpayer advocate from 2001 until 2019.

“It is my opinion that it is a lawful advance payment based on the 2019 or 2018 return and therefore you will not have to pay it back,” said Olson, who is now executive director of the Center for Taxpayer Rights.

Steve Harnett, director of education with the American Academy of Estate Planning Attorneys, agreed that the payments do not need to be returned, unless the IRS says otherwise.

If the payment was deposited into the checking account of a deceased person, “the money would be governed by the estate plan,” he said. If the account was in the name of the deceased person alone, and the account did not have a transfer on death designation, it would be governed by the will. If it was put into a joint account, it would go to the joint account holder unless there was a beneficiary on the account, in which case it would go to the beneficiary. If the payment was made by check, the executor of the estate would cash it and distribute it according to the will.

The IRS says that if a payment is made into a bank account that has been closed, “The bank will reject the deposit and you will be issued your payment to the address we have on file for you.”

Mark Luscombe, principal analyst for Wolters Kluwer Tax & Accounting, said the IRS “was proper under the Cares Act in sending the payment to currently deceased persons who appeared to be qualified based on 2018 or 2019 returns.”

He’s not as certain whether those payments would have to be returned. “The government could argue that a deceased person would not be allowed a credit on the 2020 tax return and therefore was not eligible for the advance payment.” But it could be argued that “based on the Senate Finance Committee language the individual is entitled to keep it.”

Q: My checking account is overdrawn. Can my bank apply my stimulus payment to the negative balance?

A: Yes. “The Cares Act does not prohibit banks from taking part of the stimulus payment to cover a negative balance, a defaulted loan other than a credit card, or overdraft fees. But many banks have pledged not to do so,” according to the National Consumer Law Center.

In emails, Wells Fargo, Bank of America, Chase and Citi all said they will temporarily defer collection of negative balances, or credit the overdrawn amount, for 30 days, or about 30 days in Chase’s case, so customers have full access to their stimulus payments.

USAA said it will no longer apply stimulus payments to customer debts after the American Prospect reported that its bank took $3,400 in Cares Act payments from the family of a disabled veteran to offset a debt at the banks.

“For active member deposit accounts, we have paused the recovery of any negative account balance existing at the time their stimulus payment was deposited for a period of 90 days, allowing members access to their full stimulus payment for this time period. This policy is being applied retroactively to any member accounts with a negative balance at the time their stimulus checks were deposited,” it said on its website.

For more on this issue, see the law center’s FAQ at https://bit.ly/taxlawfaq.

Kathleen Pender is a San Francisco Chronicle columnist. Email: kpender@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @kathpender