SALT LAKE CITY — Sometimes it seems these days the only thing to do is sit around at home and read bummer news.

But while it's important to follow the latest developments, the pandemic isn't the whole story. Times of adversity often bring out the best in people. There are lots of Utahns determined to make this time better by helping out where they can.

KSL.com’s new Uplifting Utah column showcases the good done by those around you. If you have a feel-good, local story, we’d love to hear about it! Email us the social media post or a description of the story in 200 words or less to web@ksl.com with the subject line “Uplifting Utah” and we'll pick some to share.

For now, here are four uplifting stories that will brighten your day:

Returning missionaries forego luggage to help Fijians

The Fiji Times reported this week that 68 returning missionaries of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints left their luggage behind in Kiribati to lighten their plane and allow 11 Fijians to return home on the flight with them.

The Fiji Airways flight was from Kiribati to Nadi, Fiji, where the missionaries then caught a trans-Pacific flight to Salt Lake City.

According to the article, Fijian Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama praised the missionaries for their good deed.

“Thanks to their sacrifice, these Fijians are all safely back in Fiji, where they’ll be reunited with their families after a mandatory two-week quarantine,” Bainimarama said.

“Because while this virus can shut borders, keep us at home and even take lives, it cannot rob us of our humanity. It cannot diminish the love we hold for others, regardless of who they are, where they come from or the faith they follow."

Lehi police continue Easter tradition

Above and beyond

Christmas in April?

KSL.com’s Uplifting Utah column features feel-good stories sent in from people outside the newsroom. To share the stories that have made your day better, email them in 200 words or less to web@ksl.com and we'll pick some to share. Photos and videos are encouraged*. Stories may be edited for length and clarity.

*By submitting a photo, you affirm you own or otherwise control each photograph/video/image submitted. Once submitted, Deseret Digital Media, the operator of KSL.com, and its affiliates shall have a non-exclusive right and license in perpetuity to use the photo/video/image, or any portion thereof, in any and all media throughout the world. This includes the removal of copyright stamps for on-air use.

×

Related Stories