Nurse Cristina Settembrese spends her days caring for COVID-19 patients in a hospital ward, and when she goes home, her personal isolation begins by her own choice.

The coronavirus brings with it forced isolation: Family members can't visit hospitalized patients. Nursing homes bar their doors to outsiders. People with mild cases or who have been in contact with infected persons must stay in quarantine.

The 54-year-old has been a nurse since she was 18. Two months ago, the infectious disease ward where she works at San Paolo Hospital in Milan started treating only COVID-19 patients. Suddenly, she had to learn how to operate machines she likens to “helmets” to help patients breathe. She studied the operating instructions at home in a kind of self-taught cram course.

The northern region of Lombardy is the area of Italy with the country’s most cases and deaths. Before she leaves work for the night, she reviews with her colleagues how the patients are faring. Not just how well they are breathing but whether they feel angry or distraught because relatives have died from COVID-19. Once off-duty, the nurses call each other to ask how their patients are doing.

“We feel a little like we’re their family,” Settembrese says. “They are patients who enter into your soul.”

Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery APTOPIX Virus Outbreak Italy Lifesavers Photo Gallery