CLOSE

Arizonans should be wearing cloth face coverings — masks — when they go out in public, the state's health director said Wednesday.

The advice follows recently updated guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and reverses a previous recommendation that wearing face masks would not prevent the spread of COVID-19, which is caused by the new coronavirus.

"Anybody who can safely wear a cloth-based face covering — nonmedical — should consider doing that when they are out in the public accessing essential services," Dr. Cara Christ, the Arizona Department of Health Services director, told The Arizona Republic. "What they are finding in the data is that people can be spreading the virus up to two days before they start showing symptoms. So there's that asymptomatic spread. If you wear a mask when you are out in public you are less likely to expose others."

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coronavirus coverage relating to public safety free of charge. Support The Republic by subscribing to azcentral.com.

Here are seven things you need to know about covering your face safely while also ensuring you are not taking away valuable resources from Arizona's health care workforce:

Only cover your face if you can do it safely

"We recommend no children under the age of 2 should ever wear a mask," Christ said.

Anyone who has trouble breathing, is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance also should not wear one, public health officials say.

Face covering does not need to be a medical-grade mask

The two most predominant types of medical-grade masks are surgical and N95. But to use a face covering ethically, save the medical-grade masks for health care workers.

Unless someone has a doctor's order to wear an N95 or surgical mask, they do not need to wear one, Christ said. People who work in health care are at much higher risk than the general public and they need N95 masks more than we do, she said.

"We want to save those critical resources for our health care workers and first responders," Christ said. "We still have a shortage nationwide of those, so they really do need to be preserved for our health care workers and first responders."

The particle size that can enter an N95 mask, sometimes called an N95 respirator, is much smaller — the 95 means it keeps out 95% of particulates. They were designed in health care settings for diseases like tuberculosis, measles or chicken pox, which are spread by airborne droplets that are so small that they could still be breathed in through a regular surgical mask. A surgical mask is looser fitting, and is the mask more commonly worn in health care settings.

Linda Hart stands for a portrait outside Safeway in Phoenix on April 5, 2020. She's worn her "summer gear" as a mask for a few days now. (Photo: Eli Imadali/The Republic)

"The current belief with COVID-19 is it's primarily a droplet-spread infection, meaning that when someone coughs, the droplets don't stay suspended in the air for a prolonged time. So if you were to walk into that room and inhale that air, it shouldn't be contaminated with the virus," said Dr. Robert Orenstein, chair of infectious disease at the Mayo Clinic in Arizona.

"The droplets are heavy enough that they may be suspended in the air briefly, but then they fall to the ground and land on surfaces. The belief is that a lot of the transmission is actually from touching those contaminated surfaces."

Orenstein has seen Arizonans out in public wearing N95 masks. But they aren't always wearing them properly, he said. But if it's not well-fitted to their face, it's no better than wearing a cloth mask, he said.

"They don't work very well if they are around your chin or on your head," he said. "These respirator masks are supposed to be fitted so that they are really tight along your face and around your nose, so that no air leaks out of them — that is how they work, they are filtering masks. If there is a lot of air leak they don't work very well."

If an N95 mask is fitted properly, it's really tight. Clinicians who wear them for prolonged periods of time can get skin breakdown on their face and behind their ears, for example, Orenstein said. They are not easy or comfortable to wear, particularly in Arizona where the air is dry, he said.

It's not mandatory

The updated guidance is just that: guidance. The reason it is getting a lot of attention is that it reverses adamant advice from U.S. public health officials at the pandemic's onset that wearing a mask or face covering was not a preventive tool for COVID-19.

Orenstein of the Mayo Clinic in Arizona said the updated guidance engages the public in doing something to protect themselves and others from the new coronavirus.

Wearing a mask and gloves because of the coronavirus pandemic, Byron Blades of Los Angeles, takes a rest, while hiking the trail up Piestewa Peak in the Phoenix Mountains Preserve on April 6, 2020. (Photo: David Wallace/The Republic)

"You have to change your advice when you learn new information," Orenstein said. "The hope is that at some point we'll have a better approach. These are sort of medieval approaches to infectious diseases. In the era of the plague and things like that, you did the same thing — you separated people and tried to keep them away from the source of infection. We are pretty much doing the same thing because we don't have the usual tools.

"We don't have a vaccine. We don't have antiviral therapy. We don't have anything to give to people that can protect them, other than distancing and hand-washing and maybe a mask. We're kind of left with doing old-fashioned things to prevent this."

A face covering does not replace hand-washing or social distancing

Covering one's face does not negate the need to physically distance — stay six feet or more away from others — nor does it replace the need for frequent hand-washing, Christ said.

"A lot of this transmission is hand transmission. In China when the outbreak first began, in several of the hospitals it turned out that the greatest risk factor for infection was poor hand hygiene," Orenstein said. "The governor has told everyone to stay at home anyway. Hopefully, people aren't out wandering around in public. They shouldn't really need a mask if they are in their home environment."

JOANNA ALLHANDS: If you decide to wear a mask to the grocery store, make sure you wear it safely

Covering your face is more about protecting others than yourself

Wearing a face covering may be better than nothing in terms of protection, but the impetus for the new guidance is to keep the public from transmitting the virus to other people. It's not to protect you from getting infected from someone else.

"It's not necessarily going to protect you if you are wearing it," Christ said.

No one should count on a mask to protect them from COVID-19, Orenstein echoed.

If you are traveling on a plane and someone sitting next to you is coughing, you are probably a little better protected if you are wearing a mask than if you are not wearing anything, Orenstein said. But the primary reason for wearing a mark is protecting others from you. And if you are asymptomatic you may not realize you are infected, yet you could spread the infection to others.

"My suspicion personally is that they probably reduce the risk," Orenstein said. "They obviously don't eliminate it."

KARINA BLAND: Volunteers sew face masks for front line workers and find connections in a lonely time

Use the mask correctly

"There are pros and cons to wearing a mask so you have to handle the face-covering safely in order to prevent transmitting," Christ said.

"You want to make sure that if you are using a mask that you don't touch the mask, that you are careful when you take it on and off, because you could potentially touch your face. Wash your hands immediately before and after handling the mask."

The mask should also be cleaned every day, and don't pull it down when you are talking or interacting with people, Christ said.

"Just keep talking with the mask on because you could potentially expose somebody," Chris said. "You could potentially expose somebody with talking or coughing or those kinds of things and that is what the mask is designed to do — to contain those droplets."

The CDC says cloth face coverings should:

Fit snugly but comfortably against the side of the face.

Be secured with ties or ear loops.

Include multiple layers of fabric.

Allow for breathing without restriction.

Be able to be laundered and machine dried without damage or change to shape.

There are lots of ways to make your own mask. Some don't require sewing

"They can wear a bandanna, a T-shirt or a scarf and pull it over their face," Christ said. "The CDC has some videos on their website on how to make your own mask."

The CDC has instructions here: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/diy-cloth-face-coverings.html

Reach the reporter at Stephanie.Innes@gannett.com or at 602-444-8369. Follow her on Twitter @stephanieinnes.

Support local journalism.Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-health/2020/04/08/arizona-health-officials-advise-people-to-wear-face-masks-when-in-public-to-stop-coronavirus-spread/2967566001/