FILE – In this March 31, 2020 file photo, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio speaks at the USTA Indoor Training Center where a 350-bed temporary hospital will be built in New York. De Blasio is calling for a national enlistment program for doctors and nurses, on Friday, April 3, to handle an expected surge in coronavirus cases in New York and other places around the country. (AP Photo/Frank Franklin II, File)

I wrote a troubling story on Friday about how not only have we gotten a virus from China, but we’ve seemed to pick up some of their more dystopian ways of spying on people, such as by local law enforcement or officials now using drones to spy on people over social distancing.

But there’s another characteristic of Communist China I wanted to mention. That is that on every block or in every housing project, there’s always been the “party person.” That’s not the person who likes to go out and have a good time. That’s the person whose job it is to fink out to the other Communist Party apparatchiks the people who are having a good time or violating the rules of the government. Think of it like a whole lot of Karens. Yet they’re everywhere.

So guess what NYC’s well-known lover of Communist governments, Mayor Bill de Blasio had to say to the citizens of the city today? He wants you all to follow in the footsteps of the Party here and rat out your neighbors if you see them violating social distancing. Take a photo and fink them out now!

How do you report places that aren’t enforcing social distancing? It’s simple: just snap a photo and text it to 311-692. #AskMyMayor pic.twitter.com/WQdCcVf1Rl — Mayor Bill de Blasio (@NYCMayor) April 18, 2020

It did not go well for Mayor De Stasi-o.

Your communist roots are showing. I noticed you said "enforcement" and not law enforcement. Is that because the cops in your own city hate your guts? — Jordan Schachtel (@JordanSchachtel) April 18, 2020

I just texted my report pic.twitter.com/46POdNc9Pb — Cameron Gray (@Cameron_Gray) April 18, 2020

I'd like to report a crime https://t.co/g5ujHDj9eP — Stultus (@StultusVox) April 18, 2020

Yeah, I’d like to report this moron. pic.twitter.com/1ieriXfres — TheRightWingM 🇺🇸 (@TheRightWingM) April 18, 2020

Even some folks on the left hated it.

Take photos of each other text them to the mayor and then the mayor who can barely follow the stay at home orders himself will do what with the photos? Make a collage? — Molly Jong-Fast🏡 (@MollyJongFast) April 18, 2020

One unifying fact of life: everyone hates Bill de Blasio.

Maybe he would do better to examine his own behavior during all this. Because when the spit hits the spam and there’s a look back as to actions, one has to look at his actions, encouraging the people to go to events and on the subways, plus keeping the school open which may have impacted why New York and specifically New York City have suffered so much through this all.