Growing up in the South, pro wrestling has always had some sort of presence in my life. I can remember watching the poorly produced local and regional shows as a kid, and I followed the major wrestling leagues as they emerged to national prominence in the 80s and 90s. I was even on the second row at Philips Arena when Goldberg won the heavyweight championship in 1997 – the sign I made even made it on TV.

Even though I haven’t watched it in years, I’m aware of the influence that pro wrestling has had on Southern culture, even for those of us who never had illusions of its reality. Would I ever think of pro wrestling as an essential business in the days of coronavirus? Nope.

One of the more interesting features of the federalism of the COVID-19 crisis is how different states are handling shelter in place orders. We’re seeing plenty of differing opinions on what constitutes essential business under our new paradigm.

For example, in Florida, World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) wasn’t initially an essential business under Governor Ron DeSantis’ quarantine order on April 1, but apparently that has changed and the WWE will continue taping matches without audiences.

The Miami Herald reports:

At a press conference Monday, Orange County Mayor Jerry Demings was asked whether WWE would continue operations. He said that WWE was not originally deemed an “essential business,” a designation allowing it to stay open during the state’s “shelter-in-place” order. However, a conversation with DeSantis changed that.

“I think initially there was a review that was done and they were not initially deemed an essential business. With some conversation with the governor’s office regarding the governor’s [stay-at-home] order, they were deemed an essential business,” Demings said. “Therefore, they were allowed to remain open.”

In a way, I can understand some of the reasoning. People need entertainment these days, and it’s a shame that live sports can’t be part of the entertainment that we seek. I miss college and professional baseball, and I’ve been filling that space in my life with MLB network rebroadcasts and the University of Georgia’s podcasts of classic games.

Now, I’ll admit that I haven’t watched any WWE broadcasts with no audience, but I’m having a hard time imagining what the matches are like without the crowd interplay that’s so crucial to the entertainment.

Nevertheless, we all need a break from the repetitively bleak news that’s out there. And sure, we have endless streaming options to occupy our time, but new sporting events have been sorely missing.

That must be the only justification for the decision to allow them to continue to operate, but we can all agree that it’s funny to call pro wrestling “essential.” Oh well…whatever gets us through these times.