Not having it. Disgraced comedian Bill Cosby is livid that his insurance company AIG has settled with Chloe Goins, who filed a civil case accusing the incarcerated star of sexually assaulting her at a 2008 Playboy Mansion party when she was 18.

“Yesterday, our legal team was informed that AIG decided to settle a frivolous lawsuit, which was made by Chloe Goins, over the objections of Mr. Cosby,” Andrew Wyatt, a spokesperson for the 81-year-old actor, said in a statement shared with National ENQUIRER on Tuesday, April 16. “AIG ignored the fact that the Los Angeles District attorney found that ‘there is no evidence’ to support Ms. Goins’ claims.”

Wyatt also noted in his statement that Cosby’s team had medical records to show that the Cosby Show star was recovering from eye surgery in New York at the time of the alleged abuse in 2008. Goins claims that during the shindig in Los Angeles, Cosby had drugged and raped her.

The actor, who has been an AIG policyholder for more than two decades, slammed the insurer. “AIG’s conduct is ‘despicable’ and I can only imagine how terribly they’re treating their policyholders who don’t have my means and my resources,” fumed Cosby in the statement. “It was proven by the Los Angeles Police Department that I was not at the Playboy Mansion on the date in question, and was not in the State of California.”

“AIG continues to act egregiously by settling these heinous claims without my knowledge and/or consent,” he continued. “And AIG continues to show they’re complicit in this scheme to destroy me and my family. I encourage all of AIG’s policyholders to drop this pathetic insurance company quickly before they destroy you and your family.”

Cosby concluded by noting that he would continue to purse his claims against Goins.

Radar Online previously reported that Cosby’s team had filed to bifurcate his statute-of-limitations defense in March. Goins previously did not file any complaints against Cosby until 2015, after the statute of limitations had expired.

The model responded April 4 by arguing that Cosby’s legal team was seeking a bifurcation only to avoid having the star testify, and accused them of trying to prevent her team from obtaining “any discovery from Cosby.”

The actor is currently serving a sentence of up to 10 years for drugging and sexually assaulting Andrea Constand in 2004.