In a titillating development for election watchers, three of the top strategists behind Bernie Sanders’s groundbreaking 2016 presidential run have announced they are parting ways with his 2020 campaign due to “creative differences.” Tad Devine, Julian Mulvey, and Mark Longabaugh, who previously served as Sanders’s brain trust, told NBC News on Tuesday that their media-consulting firm, D.M.L., would no longer be working with the campaign. “We just didn’t have a meeting of the minds,” Longabaugh said. Though they’d been hiring staffers for Sanders’s second shot at the White House, they’ve decided to part ways because “we believe that Sen. Sanders deserves to have media consultants who share his creative vision for the campaign,” according to a joint statement.

The nature of those creative differences is unclear, though the shake-up follows reports that Sanders’s 2016 leadership ignored allegations of sexism and a gender pay gap. (None of the allegations were against Devine, Mulvey, or Longabaugh.) In December, as Sanders was preparing to announce his presidential bid, numerous 2016 alumni published a letter asking the 2020 team to address the “predatory culture” of the previous campaign and a lack of diversity at the senior level. Sanders said he was unaware of the allegations at the time, but pledged to do better during a meeting last month with roughly two dozen former staffers. Last week, he hired 39-year-old Muslim Faiz Shakir, a Democratic operative and former national political director of the A.C.L.U., as his campaign manager.

D.M.L. had been working with Sanders since the beginning of his 2016 campaign, helping chart the unlikely path that made him an unexpected contender for the Democratic nomination. Longabaugh built out a strong delegate-hunting strategy; Devine became one of Sanders’s most prominent advocates on the cable-news circuit; and Mulvey served as the campaign’s creative director, putting together a notable series of television ads that included “America,” an annoyingly effective, heart-tugging video set to the famous Simon & Garfunkel song. Devine himself is a longtime friend of Sanders, and one of his earliest boosters. In 2014, he told The Washington Post that Sanders would be a strong candidate, predicting that he would “deliver an enormously powerful message that the country is waiting to hear right now, and do it in a way that succeeds.”

The firm remained connected to Sanders until recently, and produced the video that announced his 2020 run. But it also faced criticism, according to NBC News, including from Sanders allies, for the somewhat-swampy $5.3 million in payments D.M.L. received from the campaign. (In a statement, Shakir said the Sanders campaign “appreciates all the good work D.M.L. has done and wishes them well.”)

On the plus side, Sanders will be able to dodge questions about Devine’s ties to Paul Manafort, whom he worked with in the late 2000s when they both consulted for pro-Russian Ukrainian politician Viktor Yanukovych. Devine ended his business relationship with Manafort and Yanukovych several years ago, citing his discomfort with Yanukovych throwing his political opponent in prison. Last year, he testified against Manafort when the former Trump campaign manager was put on trial for bank- and tax-fraud charges.

More Great Stories from Vanity Fair

— Inside the chilling final months at Theranos

— Ivanka Trump: Americans want to pull themselves up by their bootstraps, just like me

— Reading between Mueller’s lines: is the story of Russian collusion hiding in plain sight?

— Bernie Sanders is already repeating some crucial 2016 mistakes

— Look at these Oscar party photos!

Looking for more? Sign up for our daily Hive newsletter and never miss a story.