Even the mayor’s own allies told Politico that his flirtation with a presidential run was “fucking insane.”

How did he fall so far? De Blasio does, after all, have a robust record of actual accomplishments under his belt, which is more than what can be said for, say, Beto O’Rourke. He was once the favorite of grassroots groups and leftist elites alike. Perhaps the left soured on him because he is a singularly ham-handed politician, who possesses all the native charm of a Howard Schultz, the billionaire Starbucks founder who is trying to win the presidency one sanctimonious tweet at a time. Perhaps de Blasio has never been as progressive as his early cheerleaders made him out to be; he might simply be an opportunist who saw, early on, the way the wind was blowing and adjusted accordingly. Or maybe the Democrats, unnerved by the disaster of the last election and fearing another Trump victory in 2020, have started to prefer candidates who are all promise and no baggage.

In retrospect, de Blasio was always a strange fit to lead a revived left. He came up through the New York Democratic establishment, serving as the 1994 campaign manager for the legendary, ethically challenged U.S. Representative Charlie Rangel and for Clinton during her 2000 Senate run. At the same time, his 2013 campaign was memorable for fringe positions well beyond the scope of even the modern-day left, particularly his call to curb the city’s horse-carriage industry (a coalition including animal-rights activists spent $1 million attacking Quinn during the primary and were an energetic force behind de Blasio’s election). He was a weird mix, beholden to certain entrenched industries—most notably real estate, which has only further exacerbated the city’s wildly unequal political economy—but comfortable occupying the party’s left flank.

But de Blasio did represent one clear change: He was not Michael Bloomberg. More than anything, his reputation as a left reformer stemmed from his position on overhauling the New York City Police Department and checking stop-and-frisk, a desperately needed corrective that tied in neatly with his own story as the head of a mixed-race family. The race against Quinn really turned after de Blasio ran an ad narrated by his teenage son Dante, which made plain that stop-and-frisk was personal for him. The city’s minority communities, a crucial voting bloc, swung for de Blasio in a big way. And while de Blasio is now better known for his gaffes and general awkwardness—a kind of real-life Gumby who accidentally kills groundhogs and works out in knee-length cargo shorts—he was once seen as charismatic, his whole family drawing cheers for a dance called The Smackdown.

De Blasio and his multiracial family used to be darlings of the New York press. Mario Tama/Getty Images

Upon assuming office in 2014, he quickly racked up some big wins, no small feat in a city that had seen decades of centrist-to-conservative rule (before Bloomberg there was Rudy Giuliani, who is now busy incompetently covering up Donald Trump’s various alleged crimes and misdemeanors on television). Furthermore, de Blasio did all this while toiling in the substantial shadow of New York’s conservative Democratic Governor Andrew Cuomo, an erstwhile ally who has a habit of undercutting left-leaning priorities and who eventually became de Blasio’s ruthless tormentor. The two of them sparred in the city’s overheated mediasphere over a vast array of tabloid-friendly issues, such as topless women in Times Square, the death of a deer, and the city’s decrepit subway system.