The growing spread of coronavirus has left many Americans in fear of losing their jobs, as businesses continue to shutter and authorities tell people to stay at home.

Unemployment claims multiplied, reaching an all-time high of over 3.3 million in mid-March, with analysts expecting that number to climb. Large retailers like Macy's, JCPenney, Kohl's and Victoria Secret are just a few of the growing list of companies that furloughed employees.

Conversely, a surge of companies – not just in the health care industry – are looking to hire additional employees to meet increased demands onset by the virus.

Your money is important:Money tips and advice delivered right to your inbox. Sign up here

Health care

CVS Health: The drugstore announced plans to immediately hire 50,000 full-time, part-time and temporary workers, including store associates, home delivery drivers, distribution center employees and member/customer service professionals. CVS is also providing eligible employees bonuses up to $500.

GE Healthcare: Due to increased demand for medical equipment such as face masks and ventilators, the company is hiring additional manufacturing employees. The company says it’s looking to increase the output of equipment, "including CTs, ultrasound devices, mobile X-ray systems, patient monitors and ventilators."

Food, grocer and convenience stores

7-Eleven: The convenience store is looking to fill 20,000 positions for full-time, part-time and delivery jobs.

Albertsons Companies: Albertson’s, the parent company of Safeway, Randall’s, United Supermarkets and other grocers, is looking to hire 30,000 store associates, managers and other in-store related employees.

Dollar General: The discount retail chain expects to hire 50,000 new workers by the end of April in response to increased demand from the coronavirus outbreak.

Dollar Tree/Family Dollar: Dollar Tree, the parent company of Family Dollar, is hiring 25,000 full-time and part-time employees across its retail stores and distribution centers. The company is looking to fill positions for cashiers, stockers, fillers, equipment operators and warehouse associates.

Kroger: The grocer chain is hiring 20,000 additional employees across retail stores, manufacturing plants and distribution centers to meet increased consumer demand for groceries and other supply products.

PepsiCo: The multinational food, snack and beverage company is hiring 6,000 full-time, full-benefit employees over the coming months.

Publix: Publix Super Markets says it's hiring "thousands of new associates" across its stores and warehouses by the end of March.

Walgreens: The pharmacy chain is seeking 9,500 full-time, part-time and temporary workers. The positions include customer service associates, pharmacy technicians and shift leads.

Walmart: The world’s largest retailer is hiring 150,000 employees though May to meet a spike in demand amid the coronavirus pandemic. The company notes positions are temporary but could transition to permanent roles. Walmart is currently offering $150 and $300 bonuses to its part-time and full-time employees working to keep the grocery chain stocked.

Looking for a job?:How to find a job, unemployment insurance during coronavirus pandemic

Coronavirus:As employers weigh layoffs, these job listings are surging due to pandemic

Retail sales

Lowes: The home improvement company is expecting to add 30,000 full-time, part-time and seasonal employees to meet the demand created by the coronavirus.

Target: Target is looking to fill over 9,000 positions across its retail stores and distribution centers. The company announced on March 20 its plans to invest $300 million in employees, increasing wages, bonus payouts, relief programs and a new paid leave program.

Ace:Ace Hardware and its independent stores plan to hire over 30,000 workers for full time, part time and seasonal jobs.

Delivery

Amazon: The online marketplace behemoth is hiring 100,000 full-time and part-time employees across the company's fulfillment centers and delivery network. "We are seeing a significant increase in demand, which means our labor needs are unprecedented for this time of year," the tech giant said in a blog post.

Instacart: The grocery delivery and pickup company is hiring 300,000 full-service shoppers due to increased demand for grocery delivery as more consumers are advised to stay home. The company plans to bring on the additional workers over the next three months.

Domino's: The Ann Arbor, Michigan-based company is looking to add 10,000 employees to meet increased delivery demands at its nationwide locations.

Pizza Hut: Pizza Hut and its franchisees are hiring 30,000 full-time and part-time positions, including restaurant team members, delivery drivers and shift leaders.

Papa John's: The pizza chain is looking to immediately hire 20,000 restaurant team members. The company says applicants can potentially be interviewed and start the same day.

Shipt: Shipt is hiring thousands of additional shoppers nationwide to meet the rise in demand for groceries and household essentials.

Telecommunications

Microsoft: Microsoft's website lists over 4,000 open positions, including roles for its workplace chat app, Microsoft Teams.

Outschool: The online education company, Outschool is hiring 5,000 teachers to start offering online classes for K-12. "With Outschool, teachers can offer the classes they’ve always wanted to teach, to small groups of motivated students, via online video chat," the company said in a blog post.

Slack: The productivity chat app has seen a massive surge in users as people across the country work remotely amid the pandemic. The company's hiring website includes over 200 open positions, including engineering and management roles.

Zoom: The popular video-conferencing app is hiring for full-time positions across engineering, finance, IT, sales and other departments.

Follow on Jazmin Goodwin: @jazminkgoodwin.