CLOSE

Anthony Valenzuela and Brittney Martinez (Photo: Maricopa County Sheriff's Office)

A Phoenix man and woman have been charged with first-degree murder in connection with the killing of a man in a drive-by shooting, according to court documents.

On Feb. 23, Phoenix Police Department officers responded to an emergency call near 83rd Avenue and McDowell Road in west Phoenix. Upon arriving, officers found a man with gunshot wounds dead in the driver's seat of his Nissan car.

A bag of partially eaten food from Carl's Jr. was also located inside the vehicle. Officers decided to observe surveillance cameras in the vicinity of the closest Carl's Jr. to where the victim was killed.

Officers watched surveillance video from various businesses nearby and saw multiple instances of the victim's Nissan being followed by a maroon Chevrolet Malibu.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Surveillance footage showed the victim was killed shortly after the Malibu pulled up beside his car and rolled its passenger side window down to reveal a passenger in the front seat.

During an interview with the victim's family, officers learned that the victim may have stolen drugs from his eventual killer, who was named as "Anthony."

Using the victim's phone, officers found a number belonging to the name "Anthony," and after running the number in a search through various criminal databases, found Anthony Valenzuela, 24.

Officers discovered that one of the possible addresses for Valenzuela had a car that matched the appearance of the car involved in the shooting registered to it. The car was registered to a woman named Brittney Martinez, 26, who appears to be Valenzuela's girlfriend.

Security footage on the day of the homicide showed both the victim and Martinez placing orders at the Carl's Jr. The Malibu involved in the shooting was parked near the Carl's Jr., and Martinez got in the vehicle, according to court documents.

Valenzuela and Martinez were both arrested on April 14. Valenzuela initially denied his involvement in the murder and then later claimed he had killed the victim in self-defense. A gun was found in Martinez's purse that matched the description of the weapon Valenzuela told police he used.

Martinez was charged with first-degree murder, drive-by shooting and possession of narcotic drugs.

Valenzuela was charged with one count of first-degree murder, one count of drive-by shooting, one count of possession of weapon by prohibited person, and one count of possession of narcotic drugs. He was released on $1 million bail and his next court hearing is April 22.

Reach the reporter Connor Van Ligten at Connor.VanLigten@arizonarepublic.com or on Twitter @Connor_VL.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/phoenix-breaking/2020/04/15/phoenix-man-woman-charged-murder-drive-by-shooting/5141625002/