What you need to know about Bay Area shelter in place orders due to coronavirus

A woman walks along through the Financial District past the closed Homage Ltd. restaurant which is normally open for breakfast and lunch Monday, March 16, 2020, in San Francisco. Millions of California's oldest and youngest residents stayed home Monday as officials took increasingly strident steps to separate people and contain the spread of the coronavirus. Evidence that people were staying home included traffic flowing freely on some freeways that are normally congested during rush hours.(AP Photo/Eric Risberg) less A woman walks along through the Financial District past the closed Homage Ltd. restaurant which is normally open for breakfast and lunch Monday, March 16, 2020, in San Francisco. Millions of California's oldest ... more Photo: Eric Risberg/AP Photo: Eric Risberg/AP Image 1 of / 26 Caption Close What you need to know about Bay Area shelter in place orders due to coronavirus 1 / 26 Back to Gallery

For more coverage, visit our complete coronavirus section here.

On Monday, six Bay Area counties announced shelter in place orders will be enacted starting at midnight.

Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, San Francisco, San Mateo, and Santa Clara counties issued orders that direct residents to stay in their homes whenever possible, leaving only for essential functions like food shopping or doctor visits.

Here's what you need to know about the shelter in place orders:

How long does it last?

Through April 7, at least for now. The order can be modified — either lengthened or shortened — if public health officials deem it necessary.

Who is required to stay at home?

Everyone except those providing "essential services" or working in exempted businesses. This includes a lot of people, though, because many businesses are allowed to stay open during the shelter in place.

What will still be open?

Lots of things. Here's a list:

Essential services like health care operations and infrastructure

Pharmacies, grocery stores, certified farmers' markets, convenience stores, food banks and the like.

Businesses that provide food, shelter and social services

Gas stations and auto repair shops

Hardware stores

Banks and financial institutions

Plumbers, electricians and exterminators

Businesses that provide mailing and shipping services, including the post office

Educational institutions, as long as social distancing is practiced. Many school districts and institutions of higher learning have already canceled school, however.

Laundromats, dry cleaners and laundry services

Restaurants but only for delivery or take-out

Businesses that "supply products needed for people to work from home"; businesses that "supply other essential businesses with the support or supplies necessary to operate"; businesses that ship or deliver groceries and food

Airlines, taxis or private transportation for essential activities

Home-based care for seniors, adults or children who require medical assistance

Residential facilities and shelters

Professional services such as legal and accounting services

Child care facilities

Newspapers, television, radio and other media

In additional, key government services will continue as before, like police, fire and garbage pick-ups.

"These measure will be disruptive to day-to-day life, but there is no need to panic," San Francisco Mayor London Breed said. "Essential government services will continue."

So I can still go to restaurants?

Yes, but only for take-out. There is no dine-in option. Food delivery services are also still allowed to operate.

Will police be enforcing the order?

Yes, but with a "compassionate, common sense approach," said San Francisco Police Chief Bill Scott. "We are asking for voluntary compliance. Yes, by law, enforcement is an option, but that is not our desire. That is not what we intend to do," Scott said. "We intend to adhere to the spirit of what that's about in keeping people safe and keeping this virus from spreading."

Is public transit included in the order?

SFMTA Director of Transportation Jeffrey Tumlin said Muni will continue to operate, and BART is also exempt from the shelter in place order.

"BART will continue to provide regular service for riders performing essential activities and for riders travelling to and from 'essential business' work, with long enough trains to allow for social distancing," the agency tweeted Monday afternoon.

Caltrain is reducing its weekday service starting March 17 due to a decline in ridership.

Can I go outside?

Yes, you're allowed to go outside but social distancing measures should be implemented. That means keeping at least six feet between you and others and avoiding contact with elderly and vulnerable individuals.

"You will still be able to walk your dog or go on a hike alone or someone you live with, or even another person as long as you keep six feet between you," San Francisco Director of Public Health Dr. Grant Colfax said.

What happens if I leave my home in a shelter in place county?

It's unclear. According to Colfax, people who leave their county starting on March 17 will technically be out of compliance.

"At this time, in compliance with the order, people who leave the county during this time — except for essential travel — would be out of compliance coming back between now and April 7," he said on Monday. "People now currently out of the county would be able to return."

However, there is no indication from CHP that checkpoints would be set up.

Are the rules the same in every shelter-in-place county?

Basically.

Andy Lynch, a spokesperson for San Francisco Mayor London Breed's office, said while each jurisdiction had to write their own orders, they are all generally the same in each county, with a few exceptions that don't impact residents' daily lives. For example, in San Francisco some construction projects have been allowed to continue despite the order.

What happens if I'm laid off because of the coronavirus quarantine?

The Employment Development Department of California is encouraging individuals who are affected by coronavirus layoffs to apply for unemployment benefits. You don't have to be sick to qualify. Individuals who were laid off or had hours reduced due to coronavirus restrictions can also apply.

You can find more information here.

Can I get a haircut/go for a bike ride/go to church?

If you have more specific questions, the SF.gov site has lots of scenarios in their "Special Cases" section. Scroll down toward the bottom to find it.

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

Sign up for 'The Daily' newsletter for the latest on coronavirus here.