FILE – In this April 25, 2006 file photo, John Durham speaks to reporters on the steps of U.S. District Court in New Haven, Conn. A Justice Department official on Monday, Aug. 24, 2009 reported that Attorney General Eric Holder has picked prosecutor John Durham to investigate CIA mistreatment of terror suspects. (AP Photo/Bob Child, File)

Investigative reporter John Solomon joined Lou Dobbs on Friday night and told him there has been some criminal investigative activity that he thinks will result in some action. He added that we could see a handful of indictments next week and much more information. (Video below)

Here is a partial transcript of their exchange:

John Solomon: In my worst nightmare I could never have imagined what would come out this week. The level of information that the FBI had that raised red flags that they should have never, not even for a moment, entertained Christopher Steele as a human source, as a confidential informant, is now overwhelming, Overwhelming evidence. Let’s think of the things we know. One of the people he was talking to was a Russian intelligence official who was under surveillance by us. They had a separate FISA on him, yet they were taking Christopher Steele’s word that that was credible information. His other source disowned it. He’s paid by Hillary Clinton. Some of his information was disproven right away. He exaggerates his record at MI6. All of these things came out this week. Christopher Steele should never have been shown a door inside the FBI and instead we sustained two-and-a-half years of an investigation into false allegations, put this country and our president through an unnecessary process. Lou Dobbs: Unnecessary? This was an attempt to overthrow the president? This was an attempt to align the entire FBI with Russian intelligence objectives and missions…They are refusing to bring these people to justice! This is outrageous!… John Solomon: Yeah, I know, it’s taken a long time and part of the reason is the FBI and the intelligence community are very good at obfuscating and hiding the truth. Whether they redact things, claim they are classified, falsify documents which they did in this case. They’ve done a good job. But I will say this. There is some fairly significant evidence that at this very moment, this week, the last couple of weeks, Lou, that there is some criminal investigative activity that I think will result in some action coming out soon. It’s not going to be a lot. Don’t expect 10 or 12 indictments but there could be a handful of of indictments and much more information. I think one important thing. The FBI had something right. There was a campaign that was taking Russian information and trying to influence the election. It just wasn’t Donald Trump’s campaign. It was Hillary Clinton through the person of Christopher Steele and his Russian informants. That has to be resolved and one of the documents that are still sitting out there unchallenged is the Intelligence Assessment. Our intelligence community said that the Russians were trying to help Trump win, Hillary lose. That does not appear to be the case from the body of evidence.

Solomon is one of a few who have followed this case extremely closely. He’s been in Washington for several decades and has an extensive network of contacts and I’ve always found him to be both credible and accurate. So I don’t doubt that some indictments are coming. But the question is, will it be low level people like FBI lawyer Kevin Clinesmith who altered a document to say that Carter Page “was not a source” for another agency or will it be a big fish like former CIA Director John Brennan who I believe was the architect of the whole sorry episode?

Solomon spoke to Sean Hannity on his radio show the Friday before last and said he didn’t “believe that those people [former Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein, former FBI Director James Comey, and former FBI Deputy Director Andy McCabe] will be prosecuted for signing the documents.” I find that to be a travesty because all of them were acutely aware of what they were signing.

“Now, there may be other questions, right?” asked Solomon. “False testimony is an area that I believe Durham has been focusing on, based on the grand jury subpoenas and questions that I’ve heard. It’s possible that some of the people that gave false representations to Congress could get prosecuted for those false representations. That’s an area I’d keep an eye on.”

Who do we know who’s lied to Congress?

We know that John Brennan has given false testimony on at least two occasions. In May 2017, Brennan was asked by then-Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-SC) if the Steele dossier had been the basis for the conclusion in the January 2017 Intelligence Community Assessment that the Russians had interfered in the 2016 election to help Trump win.

Brennan replied, “No. Because we — we didn’t. It wasn’t part of the corpus of intelligence information that we had. It was not in any way used as a basis for the Intelligence Community assessment that was done. It was — it was not.”

We learned from the DOJ Inspector General’s report released in December that the dossier was, in fact, the basis for that conclusion.

He also lied to Congress during the Obama Administration in an unrelated matter.

Others come to mind, namely James Comey and Andrew McCabe.

And Attorney General Bill Barr’s remarks during a recent interview with Laura Ingraham sounded encouraging. I posted on the interview here. I wrote:

The Attorney General said, “My own view is that the evidence shows that we’re not dealing with just mistakes and sloppiness. There’s something far more troubling here. And we’re going to get to the bottom of it.” And he still considers the deep state’s assault on the President to be “one of the greatest travesties in American history.” These two statements, in my opinion, were the most important takeaways from the interview. Durham’s investigation has been going on for nearly a year, even longer by some accounts, and Barr remains convinced that the Democrats worked to sabotage Trump’s presidency. It’s easy for us to become discouraged and say ‘nothing will happen’ because, outside of a few leaks from the CIA or other similar entities, we never hear anything. But Barr’s response to this question reassures us that they’re on it and that nothing Durham’s team has uncovered so far has changed his mind.

We’ll see what happens. I am, as they say, “cautiously optimistic.”

FBI Corruption: @jsolomonReports says indictments may be coming this week in the FBI’s corrupt handling of the sham Russia collusion investigation. #AmericaFirst #KAG2020 #Dobbs pic.twitter.com/tVuBVXnr9b — Lou Dobbs (@LouDobbs) April 17, 2020

Writer at RedState

Former financial consultant, options trader

MBA, Mom of three grown children

Email Elizabeth at *protected email* Read more by Elizabeth Vaughn