CLOSE

Signs indicate closures in Winslow. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

Authorities in Winslow say an incident over the weekend in which a man was cited for operating a nonessential business has raised questions about the enforcement of Gov. Doug Ducey's stay-at-home order.

The Winslow Police Department said Daniel J. Mazon, 71, was cited on April 11 on suspicion of operating a business in violation of an emergency decree. According to police, he was warned twice before being cited for operating a Native American jewelry store deemed nonessential under the state's order.

On March 30, Ducey issued a statewide "stay-at-home" order to slow the spread of the new coronavirus. Currently, it restricts restaurants and bars to takeout only and prevents Arizonans from leaving their homes except for food, medicine and other "essential activities," including exercise. Many cities across Arizona, including Winslow, have also implemented similar orders of their own.

Mazon told police he modified his business to stay open to the public, according to a press release from the police department. He also claimed upon being cited that "his constitutional rights were being violated" and the new coronavirus was "a hoax," police said.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

While Winslow police Chief Dan Brown has since requested that the Navajo County Attorney's Office dismiss the charge against Mazon, he also asked that "clear cut guidance be delivered to law enforcement authorities tasked with enforcing these orders" during times of crisis, a police press release said.

"Protecting our citizens during a time of crisis does not absolve law enforcement of protecting the rights of a person afforded to them by the United States Constitution," Brown stated in the press release. "I fully understand that this is a difficult time in our nation’s history. However, as law enforcement officers, we must ensure we uphold our Constitutional Oath of Office while enforcing any law.”

Winslow business owner issued citation

Police say Winslow Mayor Tom McCauley first received complaints on April 9 from some area business owners and citizens about Mazon's store being open.

The police department referred to the business as an "Authentic Indian Arts Store," at 91 Hipkoe Drive in Winslow. The address appeared in a Google search as an art gallery called the Southwest Indian Art Center.

McCauley then visited the store and determined it was in violation of the state and city's executive orders, police said. He warned the person operating the store of the violation and then notified Winslow police, the department said.

Several hours later, Winslow police Lt. Ken Arend responded to the store, where he spoke to a man who identified himself as the store's owner but would not provide his name, police said. The store's owner was warned a second time about being in violation of the orders and told he could be cited, police said.

At the time, the store's owner insisted it was in compliance because he had obtained rolls of paper towels, a bag of dog food, and candy bars and ordered some hay to sell, according to police.

"The owner insisted he was now considered a 'department store' as he stood behind the jewelry counter," police said.

Police noted that the store primarily sold Native American jewelry and did not appear to be in compliance with the state and city's executive orders.

Two days later, the store was found to be open on April 11, police said.

When contacted by Winslow police Cpl. Shane Robertson and Officer John Johnson, the store's owner again said he was in compliance with the executive orders, according to police.

The officers noted there were no grocery items or medications for sale in the store. It had a few candy bars, paper towels, two bags of dog food and Native American jewelry for sale, police said.

While Mazon was issued a citation but not booked into jail, police said they detained, handcuffed and placed him in a patrol vehicle after he refused to provide his name or identification. After learning his name and issuing him a citation, police said Mazon was released at the scene.

Brown has since requested possible dismissal of the charge against Mazon, a police press release said. Navajo County Attorney Brad Carlyon told The Arizona Republic it had not received the case as of Thursday afternoon.

Mazon did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Ducey's office denies need for clarification

When contacted by The Republic with follow-up questions about Brown's statements in the press release, Winslow police deferred to Winslow City Manager John Barkley.

Barkley stated in an email that Winslow was among many Arizona localities calling for clarity in how to enforce the COVID-19 mandates.

"I will tell you that Winslow, along with many other localities across Arizona, is calling upon our State leadership to issue COVID-19 related mandates with a greater level (of) clarity because localities are often placed in a precarious position of having to enforce these measures," he stated in the email to a Republic reporter.

He further explained that the city was working with Mazon "to approach a resolution based on legal opinion as to whether a store owner can change the nature of the business while the Governor's order is in effect."

When asked if the governor's office could provide guidance on how police approach enforcement of its stay-at-home order, the governor's spokesperson Patrick Ptak stated in an email late Wednesday that "the executive order outlines enforcement measures for law enforcement."

He further stated that the office had not reviewed all of the facts related to the Winslow incident.

Arizona Attorney General Mark Brnovich issued a legal opinion on March 31 stating that local law enforcement and county sheriffs had authority to enforce emergency declarations issued by cities and towns, so long as they are consistent with mandates set by the governor. Anyone who refused to abide by a lawful order may by law be guilty of a class one misdemeanor, he said.

Although people can be charged, "law enforcement agencies must take care to maintain constitutional safeguards that exist to protect individual rights and fundamental liberties," the opinion said.

Tempe police have cited 3 restaurants; other cities enforcing with education

As of Thursday afternoon, the Tempe Police Department said it issued three citations to businesses operating outside of the city's proclamation, said department spokesperson Detective Natalie Barela. The proclamation ordered Tempe restaurants, nightclubs and bars to close except for delivery and curbside pickup options.

The businesses -— Tailgate Sports Bar & Grill, Philly Sports Grill and Brick & Barley — were found to be serving food and alcohol to patrons inside their establishments despite the city's order, Barela said.

"I think everyone's taken their own approach to educate the public on what's going on, I mean, this is new territory for everyone," Barela said.

"I feel like we're doing a really good job educating the public, and it really just comes down to the safety and health of everybody," she continued. "I think we have it down in terms of the guidelines that we're adhering to and really enforcing and we're hoping that, you know, the quicker it comes together, the quicker this can be over."

Maricopa County Sheriff Paul Penzone said his deputies have cited at least one restaurant for violating Ducey's orders to only offer takeout or delivery service. He did not name the restaurant, but said it was out of Fountain Hills.

The Phoenix, Mesa, Tucson and Flagstaff police departments had not cited any businesses for noncompliance with city or state mandates related to COVID-19. Spokespersons at each agency said police approached calls associated with any of the orders with education in mind.

"If we receive a complaint, we first determine if it’s a valid complaint; if the business is actually open and if it has been deemed an essential business based on Governor Ducey’s executive order," said Mesa police spokesperson Detective Jason Flam. "If it’s not an essential business, our direction from Chief Ken Cost is 'education first' and try to gain voluntary compliance. Fortunately, we have a great community and everyone we’ve encountered has complied."

It's not clear if other police departments or agencies across Arizona have cited businesses under the order without publicizing it.

Since the April 11 incident, Winslow police had not cited any other businesses for not complying with mandates related to COVID-19.

"Despite this unfortunate situation, no business owner has been arrested and the City is by no means operating as a police state," Barkley said in a statement. "We simply are required by law to enforce the provisions of the Governor’s Order and we appreciate and commend our business community for all of the sacrifices you are making every day during this COVID-19 pandemic."

Know of other businesses in Arizona that have been cited for violating Gov. Doug Ducey's stay-at-home order? Reach the reporter at chelsea.curtis@arizonarepublic.com or follow her on Twitter @curtis_chels.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona/2020/04/17/winslow-arizona-seeks-guidance-after-citing-business-under-stay-home-order/5139724002/