Faces of the coronavirus pandemic: Remembering those who died Over 30,000 people have died from the coronavirus pandemic in the U.S.

From a "Good Morning America" camera operator to a 30-year-old former college athlete, over 30,000 people have died in the United States in the last several weeks from the ongoing novel coronavirus pandemic.

Those we've lost come from all backgrounds and walks of life and include the very people -- first responders and medical staff, who are working so diligently to stem the tide of the infection and care for the sick. Variously described as heroes, caring educators and loving family members, they will never be forgotten.

Here's a look at some of those who have lost their lives:

Update: April 17

Madhvi Aya

Madhvi Aya, 61, who worked at a hospital in Brooklyn, is survived by her mother, husband and 18-year-old daughter.

Aya immigrated to the U.S. from India in 1994, The New York Times reported. She had been an anesthesiologist and internist in India, and in the U.S., she became a senior physical assistant who helped younger colleagues, the Times reported.

Madhvi Aya holds her daughter Minnoli in this undated handout photo provided by the family to Reuters on April 13, 2020. Minnoli Aya via Reuters

As Aya grew sicker in the hospital, her daughter texted her, “I miss you mommy," according to texts published in The New York Times.

"Please don’t give up hope because I haven’t given up," she wrote. "I need my mommy. I need you to come back to me."

Kejuane Bates

Kejuane Bates, a police officer in Vidalia, Louisiana, died on April 1, said Vidalia Police Chief Joey Merrill.

Kejuane Bates, a pastor and police officer in Louisiana, passed away due to the coronavirus on April 1, 2020. Vidalia Police Department

"He was a son, husband, father, police officer, pastor, D.A.R.E. officer, coach, mentor and my friend," Merrill said in a statement. "There are no words to take away the pain that our family, his family, and our community are going through right now."

"Officer Kejaune Bates was a man of God and all I can think of is that this is God’s plan. Kejuane is rejoicing in Heaven right now," the chief said. "We will get through this together as a Nation and community. Please keep Chelsea, Madison and all of Kejuane’s family in your prayers."

Reno Boffice

Reno Boffice, principal of the Palm Beach Maritime Academy in Florida, died on April 14, the school said.

"His giant heart gave out, and we are devastated," the school said in a statement. "There are no words to describe the loss."

Palm Beach Maritime Academy Principal Reno Boffice died of coronavirus. Palm Beach Maritime Academy

Boffice, 61, "was one lively presence," Marie Turchiaro, the school's executive director, told the Sun-Sentinel newspaper.

"Nobody liked a good joke better than Reno. He made the kids laugh, and they loved him," Turchiaro said.

"He has been a principal for as long as I can remember," his sister, Louise Boffice, had told ABC affiliate WPBF. "Really really loved by all."

Robert Cardona

Robert Cardona was an NYPD detective and a Sept. 11 cancer survivor.

Cardona is survived by an 8-year-old son.

Cardona, a 19-year veteran of the NYPD, was also a union delegate in the Detectives' Endowment Association.

"Detective Robert Cardona was a caring and courageous Detective who protected every New Yorker for 19 years," Detectives’ Endowment Association President Paul DiGiacomo said in a statement. "Robert's dedication to service did not stop with the public. As a union delegate, he also deeply cared for all of his fellow Detectives – and was there to help everyone. He will be sorely missed. Our prayers are with his son and loved ones, who we vow to always support."

Anthony Causi

Anthony Causi, 48, a longtime photographer for The New York Post, died on Sunday.

He is survived by his wife and children, ages 5 and 2, the Post said.

Causi joined The Post in 1994 where he went on to cover New York City's sports teams.

In this Aug. 2, 2016, photo provided by Christopher Pasatieri, New York Post photographer Anthony J. Causi is shown before a New York Mets baseball game in New York. Causi died Sunday, April 12, 2020, from the new coronavirus. He was 48. Christopher Pasatieri via AP

“He was, quite simply, one of the best sports photographers in New York City, capturing all the major moments of the past 25 years," The Post's editor-in-chief, Stephen Lynch, said in a statement released by the publication.

"Soft-spoken, funny, but most of all kind — he was respected by those he photographed and admired by those with whom he worked," Lynch said. “The Post that you read, and the newsroom that we work in, are less colorful today because of his absence."

Harold Davis

Harold Davis, 63, was a radio host and an anti-violence activist who worked with at-risk teenagers in Chicago, reported Chicago radio station WBEZ.

He died on April 12, Easter Sunday, WBEZ reported.

Anti-violence activist and radio host, Harold Davis, is pictured in an image made from video posted to YouTube by Truth Radio Chicago on Jan. 17, 2020. Truth Radio Chicago/YouTube

“I could call Harold any time of day, any day of the week, any day of the year,” Jadine Chou, Chicago Public Schools Chief of Safety and Security, told WBEZ. “If one of our young people needed something, he was always there.”

"He wanted to make sure that all of our young people knew that they had just the brightest future," Chou said.

Through his radio show, he argued for equality for the African American community, WBEZ said.

Davis is survived by his wife, son and daughter.

Lila Fenwick

Lila Fenwick, the first black woman to graduate from Harvard Law School, died on April 4 at the age of 87, The New York Times reported.

In 2003, Fenwick told the Harvard Law Bulletin, “I knew I was going to be a lawyer when I was a little girl ... It never occurred to me that there were going to be any obstacles.”

Lila Fenwick is seen in an undated file photo. Harvard Law School

After graduating Harvard Law School in 1956, Fenwick went on to a career as a human rights official at the United Nations and as a private practice lawyer, The Times said. She also helped establish the Foundation for Research and Education in Sickle Cell Disease, The Times said.

Jose Fontanez

Jose Fontanez was a 29-year veteran of the Boston Police Department who "received numerous commendations for his dedicated service," department said.

Boston Police Officer Jose Fontanez died due to complications from COVID-19. Boston Police Department

Fontanez, 53, a Boston native, loved law enforcement, his family and baseball. He leaves behind a wife, four children and a grandchild, The Boston Globe reported.

Fontanez was admitted to the hospital on April 3 and died on April 14, his family told the Globe.

"This is a devastating blow to his family and a blow to our city," Boston Mayor Marty Walsh said. "As a police officer, he served our community and stood in harm’s way to protect us. Today we lost a hero."

Daniel Francis

Daniel Francis, 51, was a criminal intelligence analyst with the Newark, New Jersey, police.

He died on April 13.

Francis first worked at the East Orange, New Jersey, Police Department and later spent 16 years as an investigator with the Essex County Prosecutor’s Office, working in narcotics, special victims and homicide, the Newark Public Safety Department said.

"Francis rose to the rank of Lieutenant and retired from the Prosecutor’s Office in 2017," the public safety department said. "He later joined the Newark Police Division, where he served with distinction in the Major Crimes Division as a Criminal Intelligence Analyst."

"Francis was a husband and the father of two adult children, a college student and a 6-year-old child," the public safety department said. "He will be sorely missed."

Eddy Germain

Eddy Germain served New Jersey for more than 30 years as an employee of the state's Department of Transportation.

His last assignment was on structural analysis for the federal waiver on highway weight limits for truckers carrying COVID-19 relief supplies, New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy said.

Gregory Hodge

Gregory Hodge, 59, was a New York City EMT.

He was a 24-year veteran of the FDNY and was a responder to the Sept. 11 World Trade Center rescue and recovery efforts, the department said.

Gregory Hodge is seen here in this undated file photo. FDNY

“EMT Hodge was a skilled first responder who provided outstanding emergency medical care to thousands of New Yorkers throughout his long and distinguished career of service,” FDNYT Commissioner Daniel Nigro said in a statement.

“This pandemic has impacted our Department at every level, especially our EMS members who are responding to more medical calls than ever before," Nigro said. "Now, they will continue to bravely answer those calls with even heavier hearts, having lost one of their fellow EMTs to COVID-19. Our entire Department mourns his loss.”'

Paul Loggan

Paul Loggan, the athletic director of North Central High School in Indianapolis, Indiana, died on April 12.

Loggan was a husband, father and the face of the athletic department for over 30 years.

He "modeled loyalty, dedication, passion and compassion," Principal Evans Branigan said in a statement.

Loggan "was an unbelievable advocate for NC athletics and every student who ever donned an NC uniform," said Director of Washington Township Secondary Schools, Rick Doss.

"While he wanted every NC team to win a state championship, he was he was an even bigger cheerleader for every NC athlete," Doss said. "He knew the value of team sports but wanted every student to grow through his/her athletic experience because he knew those experiences would set him/her up for success beyond high school.”

Cliff Martin

Cliff Martin was a detective sergeant with the Chicago police.

"He was a Chicagoan through and through and he loved being a Chicago cop," said police spokesman Anthony Guglielmi.

Martin, a 25-year veteran of the department, is survived by his wife and three children, said Mayor Mayor Lori Lightfoot.

Two of his children are also Chicago police officers.

Lightfoot said she spoke with Martin's wife, and that "even in her grief she said that her husband would want his death to serve as a warning to civilians that they must stay home."

Sam McGhee

Sam McGhee was the first African American elected as mayor of Hillside, New Jersey, in the 1980s.

He was a member of the Hillside township committee, served on the Union County Improvement Authority, and was the Dean of Admissions at New Jersey City University for 32 years, said Gov. Phil Murphy.

Mary Ellen Porter

Mary Ellen Porter was a nurse at the Richmond University Medical Center in Staten Island, New York

Mary Ellen Porter is seen in this undated photo. Richmond University Medical Center

“Mary Ellen personified the level of commitment and compassion that we strive for everyday," the medical center said in a statement. "She was a dedicated nursing professional in our hospital for many years and she made a lasting impact on the lives of thousands of her colleagues and patients."

"While her guiding hand, humor and everyday presence will be sorely missed, her memory will live on in our hearts and minds forever," hospital officials said.

Bernie Rubin

Bernie Rubin, 82, was the founder of Bernie & Phyl’s, a chain of furniture stores in New England.

Rubin opened the first store with his wife in 1983 and they later expanded to nine stores in Massachusetts, Rhode Island and New Hampshire, reported ABC Boston affiliate WCVB.

"He was one in a million," said a statement on the Bernie & Phyl's Furniture social media accounts. "He was honest, hard-working, fair and, above all, loved his family – which included his entire extended Bernie & Phyl’s family. He will be greatly missed."

Bernie and Phyl Rubin are seen in Delrey Beach, Fla., March 2, 2010. Dina Rudick/The Boston Globe via Getty Images, FILE

Francesco Scorpo

Francesco Scorpo, 34, was a police officer in Patterson, New Jersey.

He is survived by his wife and sons, who are 6 months old and 4 years old.

"Officer Scorpo was a dedicated public servant who served our profession and our community with pride, honor and distinction," the Patterson Police Department said.

"A dedicated son, husband and father, Officer Scorpo, was a family man who cared so very much about people and his profession," the department said. "He will be remembered not only for being an exemplary police officer, but as an exceptional and very special human being."

Marie June Skender

Sister Marie June Skender, 83, died on April 7 at Our Lady of the Angels Convent in Greenfield, Wisconsin.

School Sisters of St. Francis said she "ministered in our community for 67 years, serving as an elementary school teacher, parish and school musician, and pastoral care minister in the diocese of Green Bay and in the archdioceses of Chicago, Minneapolis-St. Paul, and Milwaukee."

She was born in Milwaukee and graduated from the city's Alverno College, ABC Milwaukee affiliate WISN reported.

She lived at Our Lady of the Angels Convent in Greenfield since 2016, WISN reported.

Update: April 11

Mario Araujo

Chicago firefighter Mario Araujo, who joined the department in October 2003, died on April 7, the department said.

Araujo was also an Auxiliary Corporal with the Rosemont Public Safety Department, a community he served since 2015.

"We have lost a man of great significance and purpose. A selfless man that served not one, but two communities," the Rosemont Public Safety Department said.

Reggie Bagala

Reggie Bagala was a first-term Louisiana state representative.

"Just one month ago, he entered the Louisiana State Capitol with excitement and eagerness to serve the people of our great state and the people of House District 54, and today we mourn his loss," Louisiana Gov. John Bel Edwards tweeted on April 9.

Louisiana State Representative Reggie Paul Bagala, 54, is pictured in an undated photo from the Louisiana House of Representatives website. house.louisiana.gov

Bagala "was a profoundly honest and decent man, who loved unceasingly," his son, Tristan Paul Bagala, wrote on Facebook. "His family, his culture, his LSU Tigers, his friends, and his home here on Bayou Lafourche. Our t-slice of the world will not be the same without such a pillar of our community and an example of the values we hold dearest."

"A successful businessman, devoted family man, and active volunteer, Rep. Bagala spent his life making his community and south Louisiana a better place to live for everyone," the governor tweeted.

Richard Barber

Richard E. Barber Sr. was a senior deacon at the First Baptist Church of Lincoln Gardens in New Jersey. He was also a former deputy executive director of the NAACP, New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy said, and participated in the student protests in Greensboro, North Carolina in 1960.

Barber, 80, "never lost his passion for justice and community empowerment, the Rev. DeForest B. Soaries Jr., senior pastor at the church, said in an email to the Bridgewater Courier News.

"Barber was a leader and supporter of vision and the role that our church played in revitalizing our neighborhood," Soaries said. "He was a role model and inspiration to those that want to live lives that matter.”

Vincent Barber

Albert Barber, who went by Vincent, was just 39 years old.

"He was a dynamic preacher, and awesome musician," his wife, Latresa Rice, told ABC Detroit affiliate WXYZ.

Barber married Rice in October and moved from South Carolina to Detroit to be with her, WXYZ said.

Albert Barber, who went by Vincent, right, passed away due to the coronavirus. Latresa Rice

Rice said a doctor used FaceTime so she could say goodbye to her husband of less than one year.

"I was able to pray with him before they put him on a ventilator," Rice told WXYZ.

Albert Barber, who went by Vincent, left, passed away due to the coronavirus. Latresa Rice

Raymond Copeland

Raymond Copeland, of Queens, New York, was a sanitation worker.

The 46-year-old worked with the sanitation department since 2014 and attended City University of New York-Herbert H. Lehman College, according to his LinkedIn.

He was the first city sanitation department employee to die from the virus.

Deidre Edwards

Deidre Edwards was a city custodial assistant with the New York Police Department's facility maintenance section.

Edwards, who died on April 6, worked with the department since August 2005, according to the New York Daily News.

"Deidre served with our NYPD family for nearly 15 years," Commissioner Shea tweeted "Our sympathies & prayers are with her loved ones, friends, & colleagues."

City Custodial Assistant Deidre Edwards is pictured in an image released by the New York Police Department. NYPD

Charlotte Figi

Charlotte Figi, a 13-year-old from Colorado Springs, Colorado, suffered from Dravet syndrome, a rare, drug-resistant epilepsy.

Matt Figi hugs his daughter Charlotte as they walk around inside a greenhouse for a special strain of medical marijuana known as Charlotte's Web, which was named after Charlotte early in her treatment, at a grow location in a remote spot in the mountains west of Colorado Springs, Colo. Brennan Linsley/AP, FILE

However, her family used her condition to inspire changes to medical marijuana laws, reported ABC Denver affiliate KMGH-TV.

Figi's family moved to Colorado after the state legalized cannabis, and at age 5, her mother gave her CBD which immediately changed the little girl's condition, KMGH reported.

Charlotte Figi walks around inside a greenhouse for a special strain of medical marijuana known as Charlotte's Web, which was named after Charlotte early in her treatment, at a grow location in a remote spot in the mountains west of Colorado Springs, Colo. Brennan Linsley/AP, FILE

A representative for Realm of Caring, the non-profit tied to Figi's cause, confirmed to ABC News that Figi's death was due to complications of COVID-19.

According to KMGH, Figi family said in a statement on Facebook, “Charlotte is no longer suffering. She is seizure-free forever.”

Joe Hansen

Joe Hansen was a conductor with New Jersey's NJ Transit commuter trains.

His son, Brian, is an NJ Transit mechanic, said Gov. Phil Murphy.

"Joe positively impacted many lives as he served customers for more than 20 years," NJ Transit officials said. "Joe was a well-loved member of the NJT family, and he will be deeply missed."

"He was just 62 years old," tweeted Gov. Murphy. "His wife, Denise, and the entire family, is in our thoughts and our prayers."

Cody Lyster

Cody Lyster was a 21-year-old student at Colorado Mesa University, where he was a club baseball player and pursuing a degree in criminal justice.

Colorado Mesa University student Cody Lyster, 21, has died from complications due to COVID-19, according to a school spokesperson. Courtesy Rangeview High School Athletics

Lyster formerly attended Rangeview High School in Aurora, Colorado.

"Cody was a kind hearted young man that was a perfect example of a true Raider," his high school athletic department said.

Joanne Mellady

Joanne Mellady, 67, died on March 30, 13 years after undergoing a double lung transplant, which gave her a "second life," said her sister.

Joanne Mellady, 67, of New Hampshire, pictured in a 2018 photo while competing in the Donate Life Transplant Games of America, died on March 30, 2020. Courtesy Jean Sinofsky

Mellady was diagnosed with a genetic condition in the early 1990s that made the transplant necessary, her sister, Jean Sinofsky, told ABC News.

While Mellady was sick she made a bucket list, her sister said. She went skiing, hand gliding, and most of all, traveling, from the Grand Canyon to Alaska to Florida, Sinofsky said.

Because she was vulnerable to any type of respiratory illness, she was always careful and wore masks while traveling on planes, her sister said.

“After the transplant, I mean she just loved life," Sinofsky said. "She was just so thankful for this gift that she got from this other family that lost someone."

Prea Nakieshore

Prea Nakieshore, 34, worked in the emergency department at a hospital in Queens, New York, where she registered patients.

Nakieshore, who died on April 5, is survived by her 8-year-old twin boys and her fiance, Marcus Khan, who she had known since high school.

Prea Nankieshore, 34, worked in the emergency department at Long Island Jewish Hospital Forest Hills in New York. She died from complications of COVID-19, April 5, 2019, according to her fiance, Marcus Khan. Courtesy Marcus Khan

"She loved working at the hospital... she loved to help people," Khan told ABC News. “She wanted to do her part. She wanted to do a part.”

Nakieshore "was a dedicated mom" who "lived for her children," Khan added. “She was the most honest, loving person I have ever met in my life... she will always be the love of my life."

Larry Rathgeb

Larry Rathgeb was the engineer who led the team that built the first race car to reach 200 mph, driven by Buddy Baker in 1970.

Rathgeb died on March 22 at the age of 90.

Larry Rathgeb passed away from coronavirus. Courtesy Steve Lehto

Rathgeb's long life included serving in the U.S. Army from 1948 to 1952, during which time he was part of Gen. Douglas MacArthur’s honor guard and a mechanic in his motor pool, his son, Jeff Rathgeb, told ABC News.

Larry Rathgeb then received a degree in engineering and joined Chrysler which ran a program in the 1960s developing racecars for NASCAR.

Even at 90 years old, when Larry Rathgeb attended collectors events and automotive events, Jeff Rathgeb said his father was treated like a "rock star."

For all of his success on the raceway, Jeff Rathgeb said his father was most proud of "the family he created and the friendships that he had.”

Franklin Williams

Detroit Fire Capt. Franklin Williams, 58, spent 32 years with the department.

He leaves behind a wife and seven children, reported ABC Detroit affiliate WXYZ.

"Frank is remembered as a kind and generous man," Detroit Fire Legacy tweeted. "He will remain forever in our hearts."

Update: April 8

Peter Armatis

Peter Armatis, 54, a coach and board member with the Fredericksburg Football Club in Virginia, died on April 1, the club said.

“Without a culture built on respect, hard work and empathy, you will only have a collection of individuals. We often spent hours talking about this, how to handle certain situations that arose, how to help players grow as people,” fellow coach Kevin Leahy said in a press release announcing Armatis' death. “Peter was at his best when he was helping you work through a problem. He didn't give you the solution, but would often just listen, ask a question and listen some more.”

Armatis was known as a mentor to those in and out of the soccer community, said the club's recreation director, Adrian Batchelor.

"Peter put his best foot forward in everything that he did. He was passionate, competitive, caring, responsible," Batchelor said. "He was a wonderful family man and his good nature just spilled over to everyone that he met... he will be missed immensely."

Armatis is survived by his wife, daughter and two sons.

Aldo Bazzarelli

Aldo Bazzarelli, owner of an Italian restaurant in New Jersey, died on April 6, according to his family.

Bazzarelli opened Bazzarelli Restaurant in 1971 with his father-in-law, according to NJ.com.

The restaurant is such a beloved local joint that, after a forced closure and rebuild from Super Storm Sandy, New Jersey Sen. Robert Menendez and then-Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno came to Bazzarelli's re-opening ribbon cutting, NJ.com reported.

One day before Bazzarrelli's death, his family posted that he was intubated and "in a fight for his life."

Jay Benedict

Actor Jay Benedict died on April 4 from coronavirus, according to TCG Artist Management, which represented him.

Benedict, 68, was best known from 1986's "Aliens," 2012's "The Dark Knight Rises" and the British TV show "Emmerdale," reported USA Today.

Jay Benedict is shown in the role of Doug Hamilton on the long-running British soap opera, Emmerdale. ITV/REX via Shutterstock, FILE

Pierce Brosnan, Benedict's friend of over 40 years, wrote on Instagram, "This is a photo taken last May outside the stage door of the Lyric theatre on Shaftesbury Avenue London ...the stage door was tucked in right next door to the Old Windmill Theatre. Jay and I played brothers in a Franco Zeffirelli production of Filumena."

"Life was so much fun with Jay, on stage and off, we laughed a lot at the world around us, at our selves, saw the funny side of life always," he wrote.

"He was a courageous man of handsome life force, that shone its light in every room he walked into, down every road he traveled, he shared his joyful radiance of kinship with all who knew him, a fine mind of intellect and compassion, he gave of himself in every way to the craft of acting, but above all else, he gave us all his great love of life, himself," Brosnan wrote. "My deepest sympathies and condolences go out to his beloved wife Phoebe, his sons Leo and Freddie, my dearest God sons, peace be with you all dear hearts."

Shannon Bennett

Shannon Bennett was a deputy with the Broward Sheriff's Office in Florida, where he served for 12 years.

Bennett was "an out and proud gay law enforcement deputy; a school resource officer who protected and mentored the young students at Deerfield Beach Elementary; a man in love to be wedded later this year," the sheriff's office tweeted.

"We love and will miss you, Deputy Bennett. Thank you for your bravery, your kind heart, and your service," the department said.

Cheryl Catron

Cheryl Catron, a civilian administrative aide with the Fairburn Police Department in Georgia, died on April 3, the department said.

"She was an important part of our team, someone that worked tirelessly to keep us up and running," the department said. "We are heartbroken here. Losing a member of our Fairburn family is an awful thing to endure. Our thoughts and prayers are with Cheryl’s family, friends, and all those she loved. She will be greatly missed and never forgotten."

Jose Diaz Ayala

Jose Diaz Ayala, 38, was a sergeant with the Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Office.

He was battling other underlying health issues before he contracted COVID-19, the sheriff's office said.

Sergeant Jose Diaz Ayala, 38, died as a result of COVID-19. Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office

"Sgt. Diaz Ayala began his career at the Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Office in July of 2006. He was assigned to the Corrections Division where he worked as a Corrections Deputy until being promoted to Sergeant in January of 2016.

He is survived by three daughters.

Daisy Doronila

Daisy Doronila, a single mom from Nutley, New Jersey, spent more than 20 years working as a nurse at the Hudson County Correctional Center.

"She gave tirelessly to her family and community," said Gov. Phil Murphy.

Tony Greer

Tony Greer, a member of the ABC News family, worked at "Good Morning America" as a studio camera operator since 2014. He died on April 7.

Greer was also an artist, passionate about filmmaking, music, art and fashion.

Greer and his longtime girlfriend, Robin, loved to travel, and each year attended Fashion Week in Paris.

Greer was a "total pro," said ABC News Chief Anchor George Stephanopoulos. "He was a consummate gentleman. Such a lovely man, such a lovely spirit."

"Good Morning America" camera operator Tony Greer died on April 7 from coronavirus complications. ABC News

"We loved every single moment we were blessed to spend and share with Tony," added "GMA" anchor Robin Roberts. "Our condolences to his family in Chicago."

To Greer's mother, Roberts said, "Your son was a good man. He was kind, he was thoughtful, he was always a gentleman."

He is survived by his girlfriend; his mother, Fannie; his brother, Kevin; his sister, Janet, and his nieces and nephews.

Anick Jesdanun

Anick "Nick" Jesdanun, 51, a deputy technology editor for The Associated Press and longtime AP employee, died on April 2, the publication said.

Jesdanun was the AP's first reporter to be given the “internet writer” byline 20 years ago, the publication said. The AP was the only employer Jesdanun ever had.

“He had the deepest institutional memory of AP’s tech coverage and patiently educated dozens of novice colleagues in all things digital," said Frank Bajak, the AP’s first technology editor.

He ran 83 marathons spanning every continent. He was also a movie buff and a photography lover.

This undated photo shows Anick Jesdanun in New York. Jesdanun, 51, deputy technology editor for The Associated Press, died in New York City, April 2, 2020, of coronavirus-related complications, his family said. Arin Sang-urai via AP

Colette Lamothe-Galette

Colette Lamothe-Galette, a former deputy commissioner at New Jersey's Department of Health, "dedicated her life to improving the health of New Jerseyans," Gov. Phil Murphy said.

Two years ago, the state's Department of Health quoted her saying, "Though it’s hard to do, we must remember to take control of our own health first"

She most recently worked at the Nicholson Foundation which is "dedicated to improving the health and well-being of vulnerable populations."

The foundation said "Colette's mission and memory live on through the work."

Angel Leon

Angel Leon, an NYPD Auxiliary Police sergeant, died on April 4.

"He served the NYPD, & the people of the Bronx, since 1981," NYPD Commissioner Dermot Shea tweeted. "All of NYC is keeping Angel’s family & friends in our prayers."

Ben Luderer

Ben Luderer, 30, was a teacher and varsity baseball coach in the Cliffside Park School District in New Jersey, reported ABC New York station WABC.

"Thanks for being a great coach, teacher, friend and always a mentor and role model for your students," the school district said.

He was also a former college athlete who played baseball at Marist College.

Luderer was "a young baseball coach whose love of the game pushed his players to new heights," New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy tweeted. "Coronavirus has taken another New Jerseyan from us far too soon. Our hearts are with his loved ones and players, both past & present."

Michael McKinnell

Michael McKinnell, 84, one of the two architects of Boston City Hall, died on March 27, according to The New York Times.

McKinnell was a part of the City Hall 50th anniversary celebration last year, reported ABC Boston affiliate WCVB.

Boston City Hall Architect Michael McKinnell is pictured at a 50th Anniversary Celebration at Boston City Hall in Boston, Feb. 7, 2019. Jonathan Wiggs/The Boston Globe via Getty Images

He went on to teach at Harvard's Graduate School of Design, WCVB said.

McKinnell is survived by his wife, two daughters and four grandchildren, the Times said.

Brenda Perryman

Brenda Perryman was a staple of the community in Detroit suburb Southfield, Michigan, where she taught high school speech and drama, launched an actor's workshop and hosted a radio show reported ABC Detroit affiliate WXYZ.

Perryman died on April 5, according to WXYZ.

Michigan Congresswoman Brenda Lawrence called Perryman "a beloved Southfield educator and community member."

"Your dedication to building up the community you served will never be forgotten," she wrote.

Former state Senator Ian Conyers wrote on Facebook, "When someone believes in you they encourage you, teach you and cover you. My dear friend Brenda Perryman was a mentor to so many who want to live free. She taught our proud history and illuminated the vision for Detroit’s future. We are so fortunate to have had her grace."

Sandra Santos-Vizcaino

Sandra Santos-Vizcaino, 54, who spent more than 20 years with New York City schools, was a third-grade teacher at P.S. 9 in Brooklyn, The Associated Press reported.

She died on March 31, according to P.S. 9 Principal Fatimah Ali.

Her 27-year-old son, Victor Vizcaino, is a medical student who brought her to the hospital, The New York Daily News reported.

"I was able to hold her hand," he told the Daily News.

Santos-Vizcaino was a "beloved" teacher, Ali said in a letter to students and parents, calling her loss "a tragedy for the PS9 students, staff and the entire school community."

Besides her son, she is survived by her husband and daughter, according to the Daily News.

In this undated family photo provided by Victor-Luis Vizcaino, his father embraces his mother, Sandra Santos-Vizcaino. Santos-Vizcaino, who taught third grade at an elementary school in Brooklyn, New York, is the first New York City school teacher reported to have died of COVID-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus. Vizcaino Family Photo via AP

Anthony Smith

Anthony Smith was a postal worker in the Detroit area who spent 30 years with the U.S. Postal Service, the National Postal Mail Handlers Union said in a statement on April 1.

"Anthony was a veteran having served honorably in the Army for 12 years. He was married and loved kids; he helped raise fifteen children," the union said. "Anthony loved music, a good barbeque and singing karaoke. He was a funny man that enjoyed telling jokes and spending time with family and friends. Anthony Smith will be deeply missed by family, friends and all that knew him."

Detroit postal worker Anthony Smith died from coronavirus according to a press release dated April 1, 2020. National Postal Mail Handlers Union

James Wilson

Dr. James Wilson, born in the Dominican Republic, lived in Bergen County, New Jersey, for the last 50 years, said New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy.

"Wilson was a pioneering physician – in the 1960s he became one of the first Dominican physicians to open a clinic in the United States, where he tended to patients for more than 40 years," Murphy tweeted.

Wilson and his wife recently celebrated their 54th wedding anniversary, Murphy said.

He is also survived by his six children.

Michael Yun

Michael Yun was a councilman in Jersey City, New Jersey, first elected to the council in 2013.

He moved to the U.S. in 1979 and lived in Jersey City Heights ever since 1981, according to his city council biography.

He was active in volunteer work, including helping push for the building of Jersey City's Korean War Veteran’s memorial.

"As Co-Chairman of Save Christ Hospital, he has helped lead the effort to preserve the hospital as an acute care medical facility," his biography said.

"He was a great co worker and a tireless advocate for the people of #JerseyCity - More than that he was a great father, husband, and grandfather," Jersey City Mayor Steven Fulop tweeted. "I can speak for the entire JC community that we are devastated."

Published April 4

Marylou Armer

Santa Rosa, California, police detective Marylou Armer "was a bright light in this organization," Santa Rosa Police Chief Rainer Navarro said.

Armer, who died on March 31, joined the Santa Rosa Police Department in evidence collection in September 1999. She became an officer in May 2008.

Armer's most recent assignment was as a detective with the domestic violence and sexual aggression team.

Armer was a "thoughtful and committed public servant" who was "always proactive and there with a smile," Navarro said.

"A hero remembered is never forgotten," he said.

Francis “Frank” Boccabella III

Francis “Frank” Boccabella III, 39, was the first federal Transportation Security Administration (TSA) employee to die from COVID-19.

Boccabella joined the TSA in 2004, working as an explosive detection canine handler at New York City's John F. Kennedy International Airport.

Francis “Frank” Boccabella III Transportation Security Administration

He then worked as a compliance inspector and then an explosive detection canine handler at New Jersey's Newark Liberty International Airport.

"Frank was dedicated to protecting the traveling public with his canine partner, Bullet, a 6-year-old German Short-haired Pointer and his previous canine partner, Zmay," the TSA said. "Frank and his canine partners screened hundreds of thousands of passengers, keeping them and the transportation network safe."

"His passing represents a personal loss to all of us who knew him and cherished both his friendship and professionalism," the TSA said. "We offer heartfelt condolences to Frank’s wife, extended family, his TSA colleagues and his friends."

James Brown

James Brown, 48, was the principal of Grover Cleveland Middle School in Caldwell, New Jersey, since 2012.

"He leaves behind his wife, Sherry, his three children, and an entire school community who loved him dearly," New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy tweeted.

In a statement, the Caldwell-West Caldwell Public School District said Brown "introduced a House System to foster team-building and school spirit, and he created an Advisory/Enrichment Program that allows students to develop networks of support and to explore their interests."

"He brought in many speakers from all walks of life to provide students with models of determination, grit, and commitment to helping those in need. Mr. Brown’s unmatched dedication to community service inspired students, faculty, and parents to focus on compassion for our fellow citizens and to make a difference every day," read the statement. "We mourn the loss of a wonderful colleague who enriched our lives with his kindness, intelligence, and humor, we extend our deepest condolences to his family."

Judith Conkey, Lewis Conkey, David Conkey

Three members of an Ohio family -- Judith Conkey, her husband Lewis Conkey and their son David Conkey -- all died from coronavirus.

"My uncle passed away first and then my grandmother and my grandfather, they both passed the same day," Judith and Lewis Conkey's granddaughter, Katie Garbrandt, told ABC News.

"Everyone's deterioration went pretty quickly," she said. "My grandparents did know that they were in the same hospital and they could communicate by phone, but they didn't know one's condition one day from the next. And we didn't tell my grandparents when my uncle had passed away. They were on life support and we just we just couldn't do that."

"I don't know if there's a word to describe how close-knit we are," Garbrandt said. He said his grandparents were married in 1963 and "did everything together. ... They were always there for us."

"Take it seriously," Garbrandt said of the virus. "We want to spare any family we can from the trauma that we're going through. We can't have funeral the proper way. We can't grieve with our friends and our family. And it just makes everything 10 times worse."

From left, David, Judy and Lou Conkey are seen here. Conkey Family

Cedric Dixon

Cedric Dixon, 48, was a New York Police Department detective who served the city for 23 years, according to the Detectives' Endowment Association.

NYPD Detective Cedric Dixon died from the coronavirus. NYPD

“We are hurting, we are crying and we continue to fight,” Police Commissioner Dermot Shea said.

"I've spoke to many of his friends and coworkers since this morning. He was known as the person who would do anything to help you," Shea said. "He is going to be so sorely missed."

Larry Edgeworth

Larry Edgeworth was a longtime NBC News employee.

Edgeworth, who died on March 19, most recently worked in an equipment room at NBC News' New York headquarters. He spent 25 years as an NBC News audio technician, traveling around the world with producers and correspondents, before working in an equipment room at the network's New York headquarters, NBC News Chairman Andy Lack said.

"He was truly one of the nicest men I’ve ever had the pleasure of working with," wrote NBC News meteorologist Dylan Dreyer. "Through the coldest snowstorm, he always had a smile on his face. ... I’ll miss this wonderfully kind man very much."

Edgeworth is survived by his wife and two sons.

Angel Escamilla

Angel Escamilla was a pastor with the Calvary Church of Naperville in Illinois.

"I personally found Pastor Angel to be a man of strong faith in the Lord, a man in the Word, and a man of GREAT prayer!" wrote Pastor Marty Sloan. "If anyone ever spoke into the heavens in prayer, it was Pastor Angel. He will be forever missed on our team and in the church family."

Paul Frishkorn

Paul Frishkorn, 65, had been a flight attendant with American Airlines since 1997 and was based in Philadelphia.

"Over the years he built a reputation as a consummate professional who was honored as a Flight Service Champion twice," said a statement from the Association of Professional Flight Attendants. "He was also a knowledgeable benefits consultant and servant leader for his colleagues through his work with the Association of Flight Attendants while at US Airways and later, with the Association of Professional Flight Attendants."

This image of Paul Frishkorn was posted by the Association of Professional Flight Attendants. @APFAunity/Twitter

Frank Gabrin

Dr. Frank Gabrin, a New Jersey emergency room doctor, "was committed to health care" and always wanted to be a doctor, his friend of 20 years, Debra Vasalech Lyons, told ABC News.

"He had survived a lot of things. Not only did he survive two bouts of cancer, he was part of emergency medicine during the AIDS epidemic," she said.

In Gabrin's emergency room, the coronavirus pandemic "went from manageable to unmanageable almost overnight," Lyons said.

Dr. Frank Gabrin is seen here with Debra Vasalech Lyons. Courtesy Debra Vasalech Lyons

"He said, 'Look, the gloves that I have a size medium, I'm an extra large. Every time I put them on, they break. I've had to use this week my mask for four shifts,'" she recalled. "The hand-washing stations, they were so busy. They were running out of soap."

When Gabrin fell ill with coronavirus symptoms, he self-quarantined at home, she said.

Lyon recalled Gabrin telling her: "I'm very grateful that I have it mild. Within a couple of weeks I'll be through this and I'll have the antibodies and be ready to go back to work."

Gabrin is survived by his husband.

Ron Golden

Ron Golden was the brother of Minnesota Lt. Gov. Peggy Flanagan.

She wrote on Instagram, "To many, he’ll be a statistic: Tennessee’s second COVID-related death. But to me, I’ll remember a loving, older brother, uncle, father, and husband."

"Ron was a tough-as-nails Marine who was a big teddy bear on the inside," Flanagan wrote.

Flanagan wrote that Golden was diagnosed with cancer several weeks ago.

"His immune system was compromised and he contracted COVID-19," she wrote. "He was put in a medically induced coma and placed on a ventilator. He fought it as hard as he could but it was simply too much for his body. THIS is why we must #StayHome."

Golden died on March 21.

James Goodrich

Dr. James Goodrich was a world-renowned pediatric neurosurgeon and director of the division of pediatric neurosurgery at New York City's Montefiore Medical Center.

Goodrich, who died on March 30, specialized in children with complex neurological conditions and created an approach for separating twins who are fused at the brain and skull, according to the medical center, where he worked for three decades.

Dr. James Goodrich in an undated photo. Montefiore Medical Center

In 2016, he famously led a team of doctors in a 27-hour-long procedure to separate 13-month-old twin boys.

Goodrich was not only a "pioneer" in his field, but also "a humble and truly caring man" remembered for baking holiday cookies and delivering them to the Children's Hospital nurses each year, Montefiore Medical Center officials said in a statement.

"Dr. Goodrich was a beacon of our institution and he will be truly missed," Montefiore Medicine CEO Dr. Philip Ozuah said in a statement. "His expertise and ability were second only to his kind heart and manner."

Douglas Hickok

Army Capt. Douglas Linn Hickok, of the New Jersey National Guard, was a drilling guardsman in the medical command and a civilian physician assistant.

His daughter, Shandrea Hickok, says her favorite memories are the adventures her father took her and her brother on.

"He loved to travel and take us to parks, museums, battleships, military bases, movie theaters, beaches, and restaurants," Shandrea Hickok said in a statement. "He also loved to go hiking, including up in the mountains of Utah where I went to school or on the Appalachian Trail where he lived in Pennsylvania. He enjoyed learning about wilderness survival and attended many medical conferences that had outdoor trainings."

"I love how caring and devoted my dad was," she said. "He traveled a lot for work but would drive hours to visit my brother and I. When I graduated college last year in Utah, he flew out to Utah and got a rental truck to drive me back to the East Coast. We had great memories driving through the Rocky Mountains."

His sister, Mary Hickok Scott, called her brother "fearless" and said he "kept serving others, even at his own risk! He loved medicine & he fought for the best treatments for his patients. My brother loved serving his country."

Jeff Hopkins

Jeff Hopkins, 41, who died on April 1, was a deputy with the El Paso County Sheriff's Office in Colorado.

He had been with the department since 2001 and leaves behind his wife, Wendy.

Kim King-Smith

Kim King-Smith, who died on March 31, was an EKG technician working the night shift at the University Hospital in Newark, New Jersey, said Dr. Shereef Elnahal, President and CEO of the hospital.

"We lost a great one," Elnahal tweeted. "Kim King-Smith was a hero."

"She was a front line hero. God bless her," said New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy.

This image of Kim King-Smith was included in a memorial tweet by Shereef Elnahal. @ShereefElnahal/Twitter

Silvia Melendez

Silvia Melendez, from Utah, was just 24 years old.

According to her brother, her immune system was weakened from an open heart surgery two years ago,

“She’s the one that helped a lot of people, very open heart, and amazing, amazing. I will miss her, I will miss her so much,” her father, Marcos Melendez, told CBS affiliate KUTV in Salt Lake City.

“You could communicate with Silvia through your looks and she would give you these eyes and you would already know what she was saying, and she would know what you were saying," her friend Acacia Probert told KUTV.

Her family said they plan to hold a celebration of life once quarantine has ended.

Silvia Melendez, 24, from Utah, passed away from COVID-19. Courtesy Melendez Family

Maria Mercader

Maria Mercader, 54, was a cancer survivor and a CBS News journalist for three decades, joining the network in 1987.

"Even more than her talents as a journalist, we will miss her indomitable spirit," Susan Zirinsky, CBS News president and senior executive producer, said in a statement released by the network.

"Even when she was hospitalized — and she knew something was going on at CBS, she would call with counsel, encouragement, and would say 'you can do this,'" Zirinksy said. "I called Maria a 'warrior,' she was. Maria was a gift we cherished."

"The Maria we are privileged to call family and friend knew better than most the power of relationships, loyalty, faith, kindness, perseverance and a smile, even when a smile defied the darkness of the moment," added Ingrid Ciprian-Matthews, CBS News' EVP of strategic professional development. "Her notable professional contributions are part of the CBS Archives, but it is her magnificent human spirit that touched so many of us, that will stay with us forever."

MaryBeth Papetti

MaryBeth Papetti, 65, who is survived by her husband, son and daughter-in-law, "devoted her life to her family and her work in the healthcare field," according to her obituary.

After becoming a registered nurse, Papetti, who died on March 24, became the director of nursing at several long-term care facilities in New Jersey,

"MaryBeth was known for going above and beyond in her career, not only because of her dedication to her patients, but also for being an inspirational role model to her colleagues," her obituary said.

MaryBeth Papetti Steve Baker

"She especially found joy in planning family gatherings, in particular her annual family Christmas Eve party," and recently helping plan her son and daughter-in-law's wedding.

Papetti was also an aunt of an ABC News employee.

Phillip Perry

Phillip Perry was the principal of G.W. Carver Middle School in Texas.

"Mr. Perry has been a role model to countless students in our district and in his neighborhood," said a statement from the Waco Independent School District. "He cared deeply for his students and colleagues at G.W. Carver Middle School, providing guidance and support at any time.

"In addition to serving as principal at Carver, Mr. Perry often umpired local baseball games and refereed basketball games, offering words of encouragement to young athletes."

Phillip Perry Waco ISD

Sypraseuth "Bud" Phouangphrachanh

Sypraseuth "Bud" Phouangphrachanh, a deputy sheriff with the Montgomery County Sheriff's Office in North Carolina, died on March 31 and is survived by his wife and five children, said Sheriff Chris Watkins.

"Deputy Phouangphrachanh was affectionately known as “Deputy Bud” by his co-workers, community and his students where he served as a School Resource Officer," Watkins said in a statement published by ABC Charlotte affiliate WSOC.

"During his service to Montgomery County he filled many roles, but his passion was as a School Resource Officer where he worked with middle school and high school students," Watkins said. "His dedication to youth led him to attend DARE Instructor Training, which he loved and believed in as a tool to better his community."

Janice Preschel

Janice Preschel, 60, of Teaneck, New Jersey, "was the founder of the Helping Hands Food Pantry that has fed countless families for more than a decade," tweeted New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy.

"She was active in her temple – Temple Emeth – and was a past president of the Teaneck Rotary," he wrote.

Wayne Reese Sr.

Wayne Reese Sr., 74, was a beloved high school football coach in New Orleans.

Reese played football for Tennessee State and the Los Angeles Rams before spending more than 40 years as a head coach in his native New Orleans, reported Nola.com.

"He was a great man and role model and assisted so many inner-city student-athletes in getting to college and getting a degree," the Louisiana High School Coaches Association told ABC News.

Wayne Reese Sr. Louisiana High School Coaches Association

Isaac Robinson

Isaac Robinson was a state representative for Michigan’s 4th House District.

"Rep. Isaac Robinson had a huge heart, a quick wit, and a genuine passion for the people," tweeted Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer. "He was a fierce advocate for Detroiters and people across Southeast Michigan."

In this Dec. 27, 2019, photo, State Reps. Isaac Robinson attends a protest with community members in Detroit over the expansion of a treatment center. First-term Michigan State Rep. Robinson died, March 29, 2020. Sarah Rahal/Detroit News via AP

"He dedicated his career to ensuring justice and security for those he served, and the impact he had on his community will continue to be felt for years to come. Rep. Robinson will be missed by many, including me," she tweeted. "It was an honor to serve the people of Michigan alongside him."

Robinson died on March 29.

Dan Spector

Dan Spector was a Memphis artist who was gifted from an early age, his younger sister, Rachel Spector Peak, told ABC News.

After attending the Rhode Island School of Design, Spector launched a career in industrial design and started his own company for architectural molds and reproductions, Peak said.

Dan Spector Rachel Peak

“I’m on overload right now," she said.

Peak said her brother's funeral was held online, which she said was a "tremendous help."

"It was very painful. I mean to watch your brother get buried by video – to watch your brother period get buried is painful," she said. "At least I was able to see him and I could hear the rabbi’s prayers and I could see the other people that were there, you know, on my iPad.”

Israel Tolentino Jr.

Israel Tolentino Jr. was a firefighter in Passaic, New Jersey, who came on the job in December 2018.

“He was liked immediately. A wonderful, wonderful person. And he fit right in to that tour and made it his home," his fire chief, Patrick Trentacost, told ABC News. “We are family... we are there for 24 hours. We sleep there. And we laugh together and we cry together.”

Tolentino "was always happy to jump in” to do fire education at local schools, said Trentacost.

The chief said that what made it especially difficult was that they couldn't give him the full honors they normally would bestow on a fallen member.

"We did our best, but we had to keep our distance. We had to maintain our personnel in the vehicles," Trentacost said. "We have to set the example for safety. We have to set the example of social distance. And we did it. We gave as much respect and honor as we possibly could. Certainly we couldn’t go there and hug his wife Maria, who is a tremendous person. We couldn’t hug his kids."

James Villecco

James Villecco, 55, was an auto mechanic with New York City's fire department, most recently working in the ambulance repair shop.⁣ ⁣ “Behind the thousands of calls our members respond to every day is a team of dedicated and skilled mechanics who ensure our ambulances are running 24/7,” said Daniel Nigro, Commissioner of the FDNY. "James Villecco was one of those truly unsung heroes in our Department whose outstanding work provided medical care for the people of our city. The entire Department mourns his loss.”⁣ ⁣ Villecco, who died on March 29, lived in State Island and served six years in the Army, the FDNY said.

He is survived by his wife, Joy, and daughter, Jessica.

Bernard Waddell Sr.

Bernard Waddell, Sr. was a correctional police officer in Hudson County, New Jersey, who died after 28 years of service, according to the New Jersey State Policemen’s Benevolent Association.

“He’s going to be sorely missed," said Ron Edwards, director of the Hudson County Department of Corrections, according to NJ.com. “He was more than just an officer. He was a gentleman.”

New Jersey's governor, Phil Murphy, called him a front-line hero.

ABC News' Katherine Carroll, Jeff Cook and Andrea Dresdale contributed to this report.