Bay Area’s most vulnerable Residents of homeless shelters and nursing homes remain at risk as the spread of the coronavirus slows.

Bay Area’s most vulnerable Residents of homeless shelters and nursing homes remain at risk as the spread of the coronavirus slows.

A month into sheltering in place, it’s clear that early and aggressive social distancing efforts have had remarkable success in the Bay Area, where the coronavirus outbreak appears to be ebbing and the health care system has so far not been overrun with seriously ill patents.

But the public health response that has won accolades from across the state and nation has struggled to protect the region’s most vulnerable residents, in particular people in nursing homes and who are homeless, say infectious disease and public health experts.

Case counts show that the Bay Area has turned a corner in its outbreak: There were fewer new cases reported last week than the week before, the first time that’s happened since February. But even as the total counts stabilize somewhat, reports have spiked among homeless residents and people in long-term care facilities, who now make up more than 10% of all cases. Deaths in nursing homes and similar facilities alone account for nearly a quarter of all Bay Area coronavirus fatalities.

Public health officials knew even before the first cases arrived in the Bay Area that these residents — along with people in jails and prisons, and those who live in residential hotels and other crowded spaces — would be most at risk of infection. They also are more likely to be older or have preexisting health problems that increase their chances of having severe illness and dying.

The relative success of sheltering in place underscores the challenge of preventing and containing outbreaks in communities that are vulnerable even when the world isn’t in the middle of a public health disaster, infectious-disease experts said.

“It’s interesting how a crisis uncovers so many problems,” said John Swartzberg, an infectious-disease expert at UC Berkeley.

The Bay Area reported about 5,800 cases of the coronavirus and 185 deaths as of Thursday. The case counts continue to climb every day in almost all Bay Area counties, but the daily jumps are getting smaller now that the region has been sheltering in place for a month.

Week-over-week reports show this most clearly, and suggest that the outbreak may have peaked in the region in the first week of April. The numbers vary somewhat by county, though — San Mateo and Santa Clara counties have seen significant slowdowns in their local outbreaks, while San Francisco continues to see spikes.

Public health officials warn that because the case counts are still increasing, albeit at a slower pace, the Bay Area remains at risk of seeing a surge in patients that could overwhelm hospitals, or at least push them close to capacity. And they expect that stay-home orders will remain in place for at least two more weeks and probably well into May.

As case counts stabilize, the relative impact on certain communities has become more striking. For example, San Francisco reported about 300 new coronavirus cases in the past seven days, but almost a third of those were at one homeless shelter. None of the people who tested positive at the shelter reported serious symptoms.

Two outbreaks at nursing homes in Hayward and Castro Valley infected 112 residents and staff; 14 residents have died. They make up 11% of all coronavirus cases in Alameda County and 36% of deaths. In Santa Clara County, 309 cases have been reported in two dozen long-term care facilities — for about 17% of the county’s 1,800 total cases. Deaths in long-term care facilities account for 25% of all Santa Clara County coronavirus fatalities.

A Chronicle analysis found about 400 coronavirus cases in Bay Area long-term care facilities as of April 10; another 230 cases have since been reported or made public. At least 45 cases have been reported in people living in residential hotels or who are homeless and not in a shelter. More than two dozen cases have been identified in jails.

Altogether, outbreaks among especially vulnerable communities account for at least 14% of all cases in the Bay Area, public health experts say. And the numbers are probably much higher, since many counties don’t separate cases in at-risk communities from the total reports.

Many of the problems that have come to light in the pandemic are tied to deeply rooted, systemic challenges, such as homelessness. Long-term care facilities are frequent sources of public health crises, most often due to outbreaks from diseases like the flu or norovirus.

“Nursing homes are sort of the poster child of a situation we don’t want to have. It’s just an environment that is fraught with danger,” said Swartzberg. “The homeless, the jail population, nursing homes — we’ve sort of put them all aside. We don’t have an overnight solution.”

He added that cases in nursing homes and among homeless people probably were circulating from the start of the regional outbreak. But due to testing shortages and, for homeless people, a lack of consistent access to health care, they may have gone unnoticed for weeks.

Critics of the public health response said county officials were slow to anticipate the needs of these communities and to protect them, despite ample warning that they would be potential hot spots. The first large coronavirus outbreak in the United States was in a nursing home near Seattle in February — weeks before the Bay Area began to see a large uptick in cases.

And homeless people were identified early on as needing extra support, said health care and community advocates. Dr. Rupa Marya, a UCSF physician and member of the national Do No Harm Coalition of health care workers, said that despite some admirable steps in the crisis, San Francisco has been too slow to safeguard the street and shelter populations.

“The mayor’s quick action to declare a state of emergency before we had our first COVID-19 death is commendable,” Marya said. “However, the city’s sluggish response to addressing how to take care of our unhoused people threatens to undo our gains. This virus is exposing the limits of care in our society.”

Public health officials said they have responded quickly to hot spots. They have leased hundreds of hotel rooms and other spaces for homeless people to shelter safely, for example, and issued alerts to long-term care facilities. They have released some people from jails to ease overcrowding.

“We’re not going to be able to prevent every outbreak,” said Dr. Susan Philip, director of disease prevention and control at the San Francisco Department of Public Health. “What we can do is try to minimize the extent to which outbreaks occur, and anticipate the resources that are needed to make them as small as possible.”

Philip added that sheltering in place may not have directly prevented infections among certain vulnerable populations, but by slowing down the outbreak, it has given public health officials more time and resources to help them. Instead of struggling to care for a surge of patients in San Francisco hospitals and contain massive community outbreaks, she said, city officials can aggressively respond to isolated clusters.

She also noted that San Francisco — and the rest of the Bay Area — needs to stop the spread of disease among vulnerable populations not just for their protection, but to control the entire regional outbreak. As long as the coronavirus is able to get a foothold in one community, everyone is at risk, she said.

“We are all a human chain. We are all connected to each other,” Philip said. “I know that sounds like a platitude, but in this situation, when it’s a respiratory infection that’s easily transmitted, the health of our city is dependent on having as healthy an environment for everyone as possible.”

San Francisco Chronicle staff writers Kevin Fagan and Trisha Thadani contributed to this report.

Erin Allday is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: eallday@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @erinallday