CLOSE

Andi Fourlis (Photo: Mesa Public Schools)

Arizona's largest school district has a new superintendent.

The Mesa Public Schools governing board has selected Andi Fourlis, currently the district's deputy superintendent, to replace Ember Conley.

Conley resigned in November following questions over district executive salaries.

Fourlis has worked for the district since 2017, according to her LinkedIn page. Before that, she worked for the Arizona Science Center for two years and the Scottsdale Unified School District for 19 years. She started as a teacher.

"We will emerge from these extraordinary times stronger and more resilient," Fourlis said on Tuesday. "We should not return to what school was. But rather we should take the opportunity to learn from our experiences and recognize what school can be for every one of our children."

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Prioritizing teachers, student funding

During interviews broadcast this month, Fourlis said she would prioritize retaining and recruiting high quality teachers and would use the superintendent position to advocate for more education funding from the state.

"If our priorities are teacher and employee compensation and adequate resources, we need to make sure that our state legislators are making decisions that employee compensation and adequate resources are their number one priority," she said.

Mesa's superintendent search began in February. The school board whittled the search down to three this month and interviewed candidates during a livestream.

"She will build upon the great things happening in the district. We know she will lead with passion, purpose and transparency," board president Elaine Miner said.

Mesa, like all other districts in the state, is closed due to the coronavirus. The school board announced the choice Tuesday in a livestream video conference.

Why did Conley leave?

Mesa's school board abruptly placed Conley on leave in November, then accepted her resignation in December. Pete Lesar took over as interim superintendent.

For weeks, the board did not tell the public the reason for Conley's departure.

School board officials later disclosed that Conley resigned amid questions raised over district executive salaries. A district spokeswoman at the time said the raises complied with state law.

The school district commissioned an audit to examine district finances.

The audit found that eight district leaders received raises not approved by the school board, totaling more than $140,000.

Fourlis received one of those raises, Miner said. But when she learned the payments were not approved by the school board, she returned the money.

"She did so willingly and with a supportive attitude," Miner said.

Total compensation for Mesa's executive team, which includes the superintendent and assistant superintendents, increased from $1.4 million in 2015 to $2.6 million in 2020, the audit found.

The team also went from 10 people in 2015 to 15 in 2020, even as district enrollment declined.

Reach the reporter at Lily.Altavena@ArizonaRepublic.com or follow her on Twitter @LilyAlta.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-education/2020/04/14/mesa-public-schools-chooses-new-superintendent-andi-fourlis/2994658001/