Instead of focusing on efforts to curb the spread of coronavirus here in Virginia, Governor Northam (D-VA) felt compelled to sign a slew of extreme, progressive measures into law over Easter Weekend.

Many of these new laws will go into effect either on July 1st, 2020, or January 1st, 2021. Unfortunately, the news of their enactment into law is distressing to the majority of Virginians.

Sure, Northam can sign bills into law since his party now controls the General Assembly with slim Democrat majorities. But was it wise? Certainly not—as it comes at the expense of our rights and places more burdens on residents who struggling. Lawsuits, I’m told, are coming with respect to new gun control laws. The fight is not quite over.

For context: We wouldn’t be enduring the wrath of these far-left policies if 5,000 plus votes across six competitive races last year were taken. But I digress.

If you look at the current leadership of the General Assembly across both chambers, the House of Delegates and State Senate, observers will see that representation primarily rests with lawmakers from Northern Virginia. Clearly, this new majority in the legislature is not representative of the state at large.

Here is a snapshot of new laws to be aware of. I expect many to be legally challenged upon their enactment.

Firearms

Five egregious gun control laws, which the governor erroneously billed as “commonsense” throughout session, have just been signed into law

These new restrictions include reinstalling the one-handgun-a month ban (Senate Bill 69& House Bill 812), an extreme risk protection order/red flag law (Senate Bill 240/ House Bill 674), a duplicitous universal background check law on gun sales (Senate Bill 70 & House Bill 2), a 48-hour period to report stolen firearms (House Bill 9), and preventing those under 14 from accessing firearms on their own (House Bill 1083).

Governor Northam has expressed a desire to revisit the so-called assault weapons ban this fall. Its chief patron, a Northern Virginia Democrat, was recorded on film appearing clueless on the firearm(s) he wants to ban. And surprisingly, a handful of Democrats couldn’t come around to supporting it in the end thanks to the efforts of groups like Virginia Citizens Defense League (VCDL). Will they fold and capitulate this next go-around? Let’s hope not.

These gun control restrictions will go into effect on July 1st, well after the June 10th stay-at-home order is expected to be lifted.

Despite posturing about gun safety, Governor Northam and his party’s anti-gun agenda isn’t resonating with many Virginians. Why? It appears they are purchasing firearms in historic numbers.

A few weeks ago, Richmond Times-Dispatch reported residents of the Commonwealth were stockpiling on guns in response to COVID-19, with heightened fears of potential burglaries and robberies. More recently, the Virginia Firearms Transaction Center recorded a whopping 80,228 firearms transactions last month—a 75% spike from March 2019. Reports also suggest this is the highest total of transactions ever recorded since 1990. Wow.

Many of these new gun owners, who are more liberal and Democrat in nature, won’t be happy to learn about these restrictions once they take effect…

Energy

The dangerous push to make Virginia a 100% carbon-free state has largely been glossed over. The passage of the Virginia Clean Economy Act and our state’s subsequent entry into the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI) should alarm readers.

The former, which would mandate energy utility companies like Dominion Energy and Appalachian Power go carbon-free by 2045, is essentially Virginia’s Green New Deal. It was first touted in September 2019 executive order to study the potential of clean energy jobs in the state. One section being overlooked is its “environmental justice” provision:

Energy Equity: The plan shall also address issues related to equity and

environmental justice so that the clean energy and climate goals outlined in this Order are achieved in a just manner that advances social, energy, and environmental equity. These clean energy resources shall be deployed to maximize the economic and environmental benefit to underserved communities while mitigating any impacts to hose communities. The Plan shall include measures that provide communities of color and low- and moderate-income communities access to clean energy and a reduction in their energy burdens.

As it stands in Virginia, renewable energy supplies little of our electricity output. Virginia is third in the nation for coal bed methane proved reserves. As of 2018, natural gas fueled 53% of net electricity generation, nuclear powered 31%, and coal about 10%. Renewable resources, namely biomass, supplied approximately 7% of our state’s net electricity generation.

The latter, Virginia’s entry into RGGI, was ushered in through the Clean Energy and Community Flood Preparedness Act (House Bill 981 and Senate Bill 1027). This would compel Virginia’s participation in the established cap-and-trade program, among many things:

The Act establishes a carbon dioxide cap-and-trade program to reduce emissions from power plants, in compliance with the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative (RGGI). The Department of Environmental Quality will establish and operate an auction program to sell allowances into a market-based trading program. The Act creates a Virginia Community Flood Preparedness Fund to enhance flood prevention, protection, and coastal resilience. It creates a low-interest loan program to help inland and coastal communities that are subject to recurrent flooding. The sale of emissions allowances would fund it.



Alternatively, CATO concluded participation in RGGI didn’t lead states to reduce carbon emissions:

• There were no added emissions reductions or associated health benefits from the RGGI program. • Spending of RGGI revenue on energy efficiency, wind, solar power, and low-income fuel assistance had minimal impact. • RGGI allowance costs added to already high regional electric bills. The combined pricing impact resulted in a 12 percent drop in goods production and a 34 percent drop in the production of energy-intensive goods. Comparison states increased goods production by 20 percent and lost only 5 percent of energy-intensive manufacturing. Power imports from other states increased from 8 percent to 17 percent.



While the governor signed a bill labeling nuclear energy as a clean energy source, there’s no mention of it as a viable option in either of these two new “clean energy” laws. EE News noted it was nixed from the final Clean Economy Act:

That could include nuclear, although a clause supporting planning and development work for new facilities was cut from the final bill. In 2018, over 30% of Virginia’s power came from its nuclear fleet, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration.



This will lead to more jobs lost, higher energy costs for regular Virginians, and no reduction in carbon emissions. Great.

Abortion

Pro-life protections were also chipped away with the passage of the Reproductive Health Protection Act (Senate Bill 733 and House Bill 980).

This new law will repeal both the mandatory ultrasound law and the 24-hour waiting period law.

Moreover, a press release from the governor’s office accused Targeted Restrictions of Abortion Providers (TRAP) restrictions of being politically-motivated as they demand high medical standards for women’s health clinics. The pro-abortion Guttmatcher Institute, which believes abortion clinics are regulated too much (really?) explained TRAP laws demand higher medical standards of abortion clinics. (What’s wrong with that?):

Most TRAP laws apply a state’s standards for ambulatory surgical centers (ASCs) to abortion clinics, even though surgical centers tend to provide riskier, more invasive procedures and use higher levels of sedation. In some cases, TRAP laws also extend to physicians’ offices where abortions are performed and even to sites where only medication abortion is administered. TRAP regulations often include minimum measurements for room size and corridor width—requirements that may necessitate relocation or costly changes to a clinic’s physical layout and structure. Some regulations also mandate that clinicians performing abortions have admitting privileges at a local hospital, even though complications from abortion that require hospital admission are rare, so abortion providers are unlikely to meet minimum annual patient admissions that some hospitals require.

It appears Virginia Democrats have doubled down on their support of extreme abortion positions, after Delegate Kathy Tran’s (D-VA) 2019 speech defending infanticide followed by Governor Northam’s endorsement of it during a January 31st, 2019, appearance on NBC Washington—which prompted the revelation of his now-infamous blackface yearbook photo.

Sad that a culture of life isn’t revered anymore here.

Gig Worker Classification

Virginia appears to now have some California AB-5-like laws with respect to worker identification for both the private and public sectors. The bills include H.B. 1407 and S.B. 744.

Bloomberg Law said the Virginia bills are a “more employer-friendly model than California’s classification law.” Really? That’s laughable. Last fall, Governor Northam issued an executive order requiring the Department of Taxation to dig into worker misclassification.

Here’s how the E.O. reads in part:

“The misclassification of actual employees as “independent contractors” creates a competitive disadvantage for Virginia businesses that follow the law, deprives the Commonwealth of millions of dollars in tax revenues necessary to supply services to Virginia’s citizens, and prevents workers from receiving protections and benefits to which they legally are entitled.”

So it’s about tax revenue after all and not about gig worker well-being? Color. Me. Shocked. And why should a bureaucrat determine whether a worker is an independent contractor or employee?

Failure by businesses to comply with this new law will result in a civil penalty of “$1,000 per misclassified individual for the first offense, up to $2,500 per misclassified individual for a 2nd second offense, and up to $5,000 per misclassified individual for a third or subsequent offense.”

The law is slated to go into effect on January 1, 2021.

Right now, Virginians are especially hurting from the toll of the coronavirus. It doesn’t help that 16 new burdensome taxes were approved this past session, nor does it help that the governor wants to raise the minimum wage after the coronavirus runs its course.

Voting

Voter ID is no more, Election Day is now a state holiday, and early voting has been expanded.

“Voting is a fundamental right, and these new laws strengthen our democracy by making it easier to cast a ballot, not harder,” said Governor Northam in a press release. “No matter who you are or where you live in Virginia, your voice deserves to be heard. I’m proud to sign these bills into law.”



With respect to voter I.D., its critics billed it “controversial” after former Governor Bob McDonnell (R-VA) signed it into law in 2012. Here’s what our Board of Elections previously spelled out for voters:

If it was so bad, why has the state become more blue since its enactment into law? Democrat voters didn’t seem to have issues with it. Why now?

While voting at my polling station, I had no issue presenting my photo I.D. while reading aloud and confirming my address. Nobody in my deep blue Northern Virginia precinct had issues with it either. But priorities…

Next Steps for Virginians

If you also reside in Virginia and find these new laws unsettling, you can do something about it. No really, you can.

Next year, the entire House of Delegates is up for election and we have a statewide race to fill our Governor, Lieutenant, and Attorney General spots. More importantly, Governor Northam cannot run for a consecutive second term.

The Republican Party of Virginia hasn’t held the governorship since January 2013, after Governor Bob McDonnell’s administration left. Here is an opportunity for Virginians tired of Northam and company’s agenda, Republican or not, to usher in some electoral change.

Watch who’s running and support good viable candidates. Make sure there are candidates running in uncontested Democrat-leaning seats. Keep track of bad bills that become bad laws. Attend lobby days and make your voice heard in Richmond. Organize and empower grassroots coalitions across different sectors. Register people to vote.

Follow our reporting here at The Resurgent for the latest updates from Virginia.