When it came to Bob Fosse’s love life, there were no clean act breaks. As the second episode of FX’s Fosse/Verdon attests, the choreographer (played by Sam Rockwell) met and fell for Gwen Verdon (Michelle Williams) while still married to Joan McCracken (Susan Misner). Before that, he fell for McCracken while still married to first wife and dance partner Mary Ann Niles. But McCracken stood out from Fosse’s revolving door of romantic partners. And, decades after the marriage crumbled, Fosse would call McCracken “the biggest influence in my life.”

“She was the one who changed it and gave it direction,” Fosse elaborated. He met McCracken—who was about a decade older than he was—when he was still harboring dreams of a career as a dancer. But McCracken was able to size up his ability and re-adjust his ambitions in an instant. “She saw that I wasn’t going to be Fred Astaire, that I was floundering. So, she persuaded me to knock off for a year and go back to school to study not only dancing but movement, acting, speech, and music.”

McCracken and Fosse met in 1949 while working on the comedy-musical Dance Me a Song. McCracken was one of the stars, while Fosse and Niles were specialty dancers. By that point, McCracken had become a sensation for her ability to merge comedy and dance—best demonstrated in her “Many a New Day” pratfall during the original Oklahoma! production. She had a Warner Bros. contract, a sophisticated taste in literature, and an impressive Rolodex that included Truman Capote. (McCracken is rumored to be one of the inspirations for Capote’s Breakfast at Tiffany’s protagonist.)

“Joan had a lot of friends,” acknowledged Fosse, according to McCracken biographer Lisa Jo Sagolla, 0“artists and writers and composers, and we would have a party and people like Truman Capote would be around. I’d just sit in a corner and say nothing, and I guess everyone thought I was just her trick. But I’d listen to this verbal dexterity, and it was another world.”

According to Sagolla, McCracken and Fosse’s affair began during the show’s Boston tryouts. Though McCracken and Fosse tried to keep the romance a secret, Niles soon discovered Fosse was sleeping with one of the show’s stars. She wasn’t just heartbroken. Per Fosse biographer Sam Wasson, “That McCracken continued to upstage her onstage was a humiliation almost too perverse to bear.”