A federal grand jury in New Mexico has indicted five Muslims who allegedly trained children to carry out school massacres on terrorism-related offenses, conspiracy to commit murder and kidnapping.

The five were arrested Aug. 3, 2018, after authorities in a raid found 11 hungry children living in squalid conditions in a remote, makeshift training compound.

The leader, Siraj Ibn Wahhaj, is the son of Imam Siraj Wahhaj, a former board member of the Council on American-Islamic Relations who is on record urging a violent overthrow of the "filthy" U.S. government. The elder Wahhaj gave an opening prayer at an event at the Democratic National Convention in 2012, pointed out Matthew Vadum in an column for FrontPage Magazine. The imam also has been called a spiritual adviser to jihad promoter and Bernie Sanders supporter Linda Sarsour. Vadum wrote that the "openly anti-Semitic Sarsour sits on the board of the Women's March organization and openly admits membership in America’s largest Marxist group, the Democratic Socialists of America."

TRENDING: Obama AG Eric Holder giddy about 'opportunity' coronavirus presents to make 'permanent' changes

The imam has insisted his son's problems with the law amounted to a domestic conflict that has nothing to do with Islam.

The defendants previously were indicted on weapons and conspiracy charges. The new indictment, issued Thursday, alleges "the defendants conspired to provide material support in preparation for violent attacks against federal law enforcement officers and members of the military," said Assistant Attorney General John C. Demers.

"Advancing beliefs through terror and violence has no place in America, and the National Security Division continues to make protecting against terrorism its top priority," he said.

The defendants, along with Siraj Ibn Wahhaj, are Jany Leveille, Hujrah Wahhaj, Subhanah Wahhaj and Lucas Morton. Leveille, Wahhaj's "Islamic wife," is an illegal immigrant from Haiti who also is under investigation by federal immigration authorities for overstaying her non-immigrant visitor visa.

During the raid, authorities found the remains of a 3-year-old disabled boy who later was identified as the son of Siraj Ibn Wahhaj. The indictment accused Wahhaj of kidnapping the boy from his legal wife and transporting him from Georgia to New Mexico.

Leveille allegedly told the children the boy would be resurrected as "Jesus Christ" and would tell the group which government institutions they should target.

FBI Special Agent Travis Taylor testified Leveille and her husband "sought to recruit and train persons, including minor children, to be prepared to engage in jihad and train an army of jihad and to die as martyrs."

According to court documents, the five defendants "established a residence, training camp, and firing range at which they stored firearms and ammunition and engaged in firearms and tactical training as part of their common plan to prepare for violent attacks on government, military, educational, and financial institutions in fulfillment of" Leveille’s "religious prophecies."

'The only alternative for mankind'

Vadum noted the elder Wahhaj was a close associate of Omar Abdel Rahman, the "Blind Sheikh" who orchestrated the bombing of the World Trade Center in 1993 that killed seven people.

And the imam has been a longtime supporter of Hizb ut-Tahrir, an organization that seeks to create a worldwide Islamic caliphate governed by Islamic law.

Imam Wahhaj attended a Hizb ut-Tahrir conference in London in 1994 at which leaders called for jihad, denounced democracy and declared "the Islamic system is the only alternative for mankind."

In the U.S. one week later, Wahhaj praised Hizb ut-Tahrir's "scholarly brothers" for their "good insight" and "their pushing for the [Caliphate]."

Leveille formerly worked at Imam Wahhaj’s terrorist-linked mosque, Masjid At-Taqwa, in Brooklyn.