By the time the Class of 2020 started its freshman year in the fall of 2016, the Chicago Principles of Free Expression were emerging as a lodestar for higher education. The University of Chicago had assembled a Committee on Freedom of Expression in mid-2014 to articulate “the University’s overarching commitment to free, robust, and uninhibited debate and deliberation among all members of the University’s community.”

Pixabay.com User mamir_k94

The committee’s report, released at the beginning of 2015, states: “Because the University is committed to free and open inquiry in all matters, it guarantees all members of the University community the broadest possible latitude to speak, write, listen, challenge, and learn.”

Other schools—starting with Princeton and Purdue—began adopting the principles; and by the fall of 2016 the Chicago principles were widely known, if not ubiquitously shared.

“Universities should be clear about their core educational mission—to provide students with the most enriching education possible,” University of Chicago president Robert Zimmer argued in an August 2016 Wall Street Journal op-ed. “We cannot shortchange our students. This means that questioning and challenge must flourish.”

Now that the Class of 2020 is about to graduate, one wonders: How does this student generation—the first generation who attended college after the 2015 publication of Jonathan Haidt and Greg Lukianoff’s viral “The Coddling of the American Mind” article, and while the Chicago Principles were ascendant on the national level—feel about freedom of expression?

The last few years have brought mixed news to those of us concerned about free speech and open inquiry in the academy. On one hand, we’ve seen fewer speaker disinvitations and campus protests escalating into national news stories. At the beginning of 2019, Acadia University’s Jeffrey Adam Sachs declared the “Campus Free Speech Crisis” over. “[T]here are hopeful signs that a new culture of tolerance is taking hold on campus,” Sachs wrote.

The University of North Carolina’s recent report on freedom of expression seems to concur, at least in part. Seventy-six percent of surveyed students identifying as liberal said conservative students were an “important part of the campus community.” Students across the political spectrum said they hoped for more opportunities to engage with different viewpoints on campus, suggesting “a hidden across-ideological consensus on free expression issues,” according to one of the survey’s authors, UNC professor Tim Ryan.

On the other hand, that same UNC report suggests that during classroom discussions students identifying as conservative are nearly three times more likely than their liberal peers to censor themselves, fearing that they may damage their relationships with their professors and peers. Also, more than 25% of all students surveyed said they agreed with blocking or interrupting campus speakers with whom they disagreed. Campus frictions over speech still occasionally become national news: At Georgetown law school in October, student protesters shouted down a scheduled keynote speech from then acting Homeland Security Secretary Kevin McAleenan, driving McAleenan from the stage.

When we consider the current status of academic freedom and free speech on college campuses, “we must avoid becoming either Chicken Little or the proverbial ostrich with its head in the sand,” writes Donald Downs, professor emeritus at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, in the introduction of his new book, Free Speech and Liberal Education: A Plea for Intellectual Diversity and Tolerance.

Downs notes that speech-related blow-ups on campus attract more attention than intellectual tolerance, which happens quietly. Toleration is the bell that doesn’t ring. We hear about the protests, disinvitations, and faculty firings. We do not hear, as Downs says, “about the countless encounters where repression does not occur.”

Still, tolerance is not the only thing that happens quietly. Self-censorship is quiet. Job offers never extended and invitations never issued are quiet. And with his book, Downs sets out to conduct a level-headed evaluation of where academic freedom and freedom of speech stand on college campuses right now and why it matters.

Free Speech and Liberal Education is a welcome contribution to the conversation about the state of American universities and colleges. The book also serves as evidence that professors—not bureaucrats or activists—are the best standard bearers for free speech on campus. Downs highlights the work of professors around the country who have substantively changed the culture and conversation around speech, toleration, and liberal values of free expression in their classrooms and communities.

For example, Downs describes Georgetown business and law professor John Hasnas as an “internal entrepreneur” working quietly to build a strong campus consensus on free speech and due process. Professor Hasnas is, indeed, a terrific model for faculty: at a 2017 panel discussion that I moderated on “Promoting Free Speech on Campus,” Hasnas described his approach as beginning with his own classroom. His rule is that students can say anything they want as long as they’re polite and are willing to defend their words. He gives advice to fellow faculty on how to get students to examine their assumptions—for example, by presenting a social justice issue with the gender roles reversed. And on the administrative level, Hasnas helped Georgetown make a commitment to freedom of expression, then worked with other faculty to make all university policies, including the harassment policy, consistent with that commitment.

“Universities are bureaucracies,” Hasnas explained during the panel discussion. “It takes awhile to move them. But if you’re willing to take the time and do the work from the inside, you can get policies right.”

At the end of his book, Downs—a lifelong advocate for academic freedom at UW-Madison and nationwide—encourages faculty and students who are concerned about free expression on campus to lean in and engage on the issue.

“Such an engagement can be uniquely rewarding,” Downs writes, “especially when you make unexpected progress toward your goal. Like liberal education, it is an adventure. Seek and ye shall find.”