CLOSE

Well, it was nice while it lasted.

After a mild spring, the Phoenix-area is expected to see it's first run of 90-degree weather for the year as early as this Wednesday, according to officials from the National Weather Service in Phoenix.

Much of the Valley will see temperatures in the mid-80s starting Sunday and lasting through Tuesday, according to Paul Iñiguez, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Phoenix. Things will begin to heat up into the 90s on Wednesday and continue through the weekend.

Iñiguez warned Saturday will likely be the coolest day for quite some time.

With 90s in the forecast next week, here is a look at some stats regarding the first 90°F, 95°F, & 100°F day for Phoenix & Yuma. Both sites have only reached 89°F this year. If 90°F is reached or exceeded on Wed, it will be the 10th latest for Phoenix & 4th latest for Yuma! #azwxpic.twitter.com/tiB95CmNkV — NWS Phoenix (@NWSPhoenix) April 18, 2020

"High pressure is going to start building in full late in the week and into early next weekend, which should bring us some pretty robust 90s for high temperatures."

This will be the first 90-degree run of 2020, Iñiguez said. Phoenix typically hits the first 100-degree day as early as May 2.

These warmer temperatures will likely be the new normal as we head into the summer months.

"Into next weekend, we are looking at some upper 90s," Iñiquez said. "I wouldn't completely rule out 100 degrees. I think it's probably a low probability at this point, but it's definitely not zero."

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Iñiguez recommended that Phoenicians take the usual precautions to avoid heat-related illnesses.

"If you're going to be outdoors, try not to spend a lot of time outside during the hottest parts of the day," Iñiguez said. "Typically, hydrate more than you think you need to."

Reach Ryan at ryan.vlahovich@arizonarepublic.com or follow him on Twitter @vlahovichryan

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/phoenix-weather/2020/04/18/90-degree-temperatures-set-return-valley-week/5160595002/