Ivanka Trump Michael D. Cohen said he briefed Ms. Trump and Donald Trump Jr. on the Moscow Trump Tower project during the campaign. She was also contacted by a Russian woman whose husband offered to help her father develop a separate real estate project in Moscow. related events Trump Tower Moscow Russian Contacts

Jared Kushner As a senior campaign official, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law attended the Trump Tower Russia meeting. He was also told that a campaign aide had been approached about setting up a back-channel meeting between Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin, and that Donald Trump Jr. received a private message from WikiLeaks. As a senior transition adviser, Mr. Kushner met at Trump Tower with the Russian ambassador and discussed setting up a way to communicate with Moscow during the transition. He also met with a Russian banker close to Mr. Putin in an attempt to establish a direct line of communication to the Russian president. related events Trump Tower Russia Meeting Russian Contacts Russian Sanctions

Hope Hicks A fixture of Mr. Trump’s inner circle throughout the campaign and in the White House, Ms. Hicks was involved in the drafting of a false statement in response to questions about the 2016 Trump Tower meeting arranged by Donald Trump Jr. related events Trump Tower Russia Meeting Obstruction Inquiry

James B. Comey Former F.B.I. director who alleged that Mr. Trump pressured him to drop the investigation into Michael T. Flynn. related events Obstruction Inquiry

Rod J. Rosenstein Deputy attorney general who appointed the special counsel to investigate Russia’s election interference. related events Obstruction Inquiry

Robert S. Mueller III The special counsel overseeing the investigation into Russia’s interference in the 2016 election and the possible involvement of Mr. Trump’s campaign. related events Obstruction Inquiry

Alan Garten The Trump Organization’s general counsel was involved in the drafting of the misleading statement about the 2016 Trump Tower meeting arranged by Donald Trump Jr. related events Trump Tower Russia Meeting

Stephen K. Bannon Mr. Trump’s former campaign chairman and chief White House strategist emailed Roger J. Stone Jr. in October 2016 for insight into WikiLeaks’s plans to publish documents that could damage the Clinton campaign. related events Russian Sanctions

Rick Dearborn A campaign adviser who was approached by a Russian intermediary about arranging a back-channel meeting between Mr. Trump and Mr. Putin. related events Russian Contacts

Donald F. McGahn II The former White House counsel threatened to quit after Mr. Trump asked him to fire Mr. Mueller. related events Obstruction Inquiry

Jeff Sessions Weeks after he was confirmed as attorney general, the former senator recused himself from any investigation into charges that Russia meddled in the election after revelations that he had failed to report encounters with the Russian ambassador during the campaign. related events Russian Contacts Obstruction Inquiry

Carter Page Russian intelligence operatives tried to recruit Mr. Page, a foreign policy adviser to the 2016 Trump campaign, in 2013. During the campaign, Mr. Page gave a speech in Russia and met with at least one Russian government official in Moscow. He told at least four members of the campaign about his trip. related events Russian Contacts

Stephen Miller As a top adviser to the president, Mr. Miller helped draft a letter, which was never sent, that explained why the president wanted to fire James B. Comey. During the campaign, Mr. Miller was among top campaign officials whom George Papadopoulos told about his Russian contacts. related events Obstruction Inquiry

Sam Clovis Mr. Clovis was among the Trump campaign officials whom George Papadopoulos told about his contacts with Russians. related events

J. D. Gordon Mr. Gordon met briefly with the Russian ambassador during the Republican National Convention. He also had contacts with Maria Butina and was among the Trump campaign officials who knew that Carter Page would be traveling to Russia in July 2016. related events Russian Contacts

Thomas P. Bossert Mr. Trump's former chief homeland security adviser was aware of conversations about sanctions that occurred during the presidential transition between Michael T. Flynn and the Russian ambassador. related events Russian Sanctions

Corey Lewandowski Mr. Trump’s first campaign manager was among the Trump campaign officials who knew that Carter Page would be traveling to Russia in July 2016. He was also told about George Papadopoulos’s contacts with Russians. In 2017, Mr. Trump asked Mr. Lewandowski to pressure Mr. Sessions to resign, but Mr. Lewandowski did not act on the request. related events

K. T. McFarland A senior transition official and former deputy national security adviser who was aware of conversations about sanctions that occurred during the transition between Michael T. Flynn and the Russian ambassador. related events

Reince Priebus A senior transition official and former White House chief of staff, Mr. Priebus was forwarded an email exchange during the transition that said Michael T. Flynn was discussing sanctions with the Russian ambassador. In a December 2017 meeting in the West Wing, Mr. Trump asked Mr. Priebus how his interview had gone with the special counsel’s investigators and whether they had been “nice.” related events Russian Sanctions

Sean Spicer Former White House press secretary who was forwarded an email exchange during the transition that said Michael T. Flynn was discussing sanctions with the Russian ambassador. related events Russian Sanctions

Avi Berkowitz A White House aide who works for Jared Kushner, Mr. Berkowitz met with the Russian ambassador at Mr. Kushner’s request during the presidential transition. related events Russian Contacts

Mark Corallo A former spokesman for Mr. Trump’s legal team who told Mr. Mueller about a conference call with Mr. Trump and Hope Hicks in which, he said, Ms. Hicks said that emails written by Donald Trump Jr. before the Trump Tower meeting "will never get out." related events Obstruction Inquiry

Sarah Huckabee Sanders Ms. Sanders, the White House press secretary, initially said the president “certainly didn’t dictate” the false statement issued by Donald Trump Jr. about the Trump Tower Russia meeting. related events Trump Tower Russia Meeting