A full list of online coronavirus resources: Where to get your questions answered

A World Health Organisation (WHO) logo is displayed at their office in Beijing. (Photo by ED JONES/AFP via Getty Images) A World Health Organisation (WHO) logo is displayed at their office in Beijing. (Photo by ED JONES/AFP via Getty Images) Photo: ED JONES/AFP Via Getty Images Photo: ED JONES/AFP Via Getty Images Image 1 of / 38 Caption Close A full list of online coronavirus resources: Where to get your questions answered 1 / 38 Back to Gallery

Looking for information on coronavirus? Here are several online resources that offer everything from tips on preparing for a potential outbreak, to information on how to prevent spread.

World Health Organization

The World Health Organization is a specialized agency of the United Nations that is concerned with world public health. They have both up-to-date situation reports on cases around the globe, plus a list of widely circulating coronavirus myths.

Journal of the American Medical Association

JAMA is a peer-reviewed medical journal published by the American Medical Association. They currently have studies on coronavirus, including a report on 72,000 cases from China's Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

California Department of Public Health

The CDPH is the state department responsible for public health in California and enforces some of the laws In the California Health and Safety Codes. Updates on the latest cases in California and what the state is doing to protect the public as well as answers to commonly asked questions about the virus are available here and information on state guidance on preparedness for schools is available here.

County Public Health Departments

Alameda County

Contra Costa County

Marin County

Napa County

San Francisco County

San Mateo County

Santa Clara County

Solano County

Sonoma County

News Outlets

These are a few of the news sites working hard to cover the coronavirus: The New York Times, Washington Post, The Los Angeles Times and The San Francisco Chronicle. SFGATE is a free news service and has a new page dedicated to coronavirus updates.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

The CDC is is the leading national public health institute of the United States and has a wealth of information including virus facts that cover symptoms and what to do if you're sick, tips on preventing spread, answers to commonly asked questions and updates on cases in the United States (Note: This page may not be up-to-date with all patients in the country with positive tests.)

MedlinePlus

MedlinePlus provides health information from the U.S. National Library of Medicine.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration

The FDA is a federal agency responsible for protecting and promoting public health through the control and supervision of everything from medications to vaccines. The agency has updates on conavirus' impact on the medical supply chain, as well as updates on medical countermeasures, vaccines and therapies.

U.S. Department of State

The State Department — responsible for carrying out U.S. foreign policy and international relations — has a list of the latest travel advisories.

American Red Cross

The American Red Cross — a humanitarian organization that provides emergency assistance, disaster relief, and disaster preparedness education in the United States — currently has a template for creating a family disaster plan for any emergency.

Federal Emergency Management Agency

Part of the United States Department of Homeland Security, FEMA offers an online tool called Ready Kids to help parents and teachers educate children ages eight through twelve about emergencies and how they can help get their family prepared.

U.K.'s National Health System

General information on the virus from the publicly funded healthcare system of the United Kingdom can be found here.

Amy Graff is a digital editor with SFGATE. Email her: agraff@sfgate.com.