From a world away, Adrian Sampson is calling.

If possible, it seems even farther.

Sampson, who spent the last two seasons pitching for the Rangers, is in Korea and is 12 hours removed from being knocked around a little bit in a televised intrasquad game. That part — the part about pitching — is the one element of his life that seems to make sense right now. Everything else is surreal.

“It’s like the twilight zone,” Sampson says from his high-rise apartment in Busan, home of the Lotte Giants. “I just don’t feel like I know what’s going on at any moment. But I know I can get on the field and play baseball, and I’m so focused on that I can take my mind off everything else. We can get lost in everything that is going on. I think everybody is probably a little lost right now.”

This mostly was supposed to be a story about Sampson’s perspective on baseball in Korea amid the coronavirus. Actual exhibition games, albeit it without fans, are supposed to begin Tuesday. If a week’s worth of those games goes well — and, by well, we mean nobody tests positive for the extremely contagious virus — the season may start in early May.

It was supposed to be about playing games without fans in the stands, about having to have his temperature checked every time he walked into the clubhouse due to Korea’s strict coronavirus monitoring protocols, about having to wear his mask just about everywhere he goes except the pitching mound. Spoiler alert: “It gets a little claustrophobic.”

It was supposed to be about whether he thought MLB could exact a fan-free plan, similar to the one on which the KBO is embarking. It would be tough, he says, because MLB teams carry so much support personnel compared with the KBO, and that might make it difficult to monitor.

But here, the story, like Sampson’s slider, breaks sharply.

New challenge

In a lot of ways, Sampson’s life has become a portal into the overall coronavirus experience. Though nobody he knows has directly dealt with it, life in the time of the coronavirus creates all kinds of challenges.

Like, for example, this one: Your dad was just diagnosed with cancer back home in Seattle.

In January, just as he was about to leave for spring training in Australia, Sampson got word that his father, David, had been diagnosed with cancer. While Sampson doesn’t go into much detail, he does say that the diagnosis wasn’t “very good.” He jumped on a plane from Phoenix to Seattle and got in a 30-hour visit.

That’s the last time they’ve been together.

Oh, he FaceTimes regularly, but it’s not a substitute. In March when the KBO shut down and the Giants idled in Australia, Sampson considered going home again to Seattle, but he wouldn’t have been able to visit his dad in the hospital, and who knows if he would have even gotten back to Korea as that country went into lockdown. As it was, the Giants flew back from Australia barely 14 hours ahead of the country’s self-quarantine order.

“It’s really hard to put into words,” says Elsa Vandermus, Sampson’s girlfriend of 18 months.

She is choking up a little as she says this.

“We’re all just trying to do our best,” she says. “He’s trying his best to focus on baseball and being supportive. And when he can play baseball, it’s good for him. But all the things we stressed about, like just going to Korea in the first place, all of it has been put into a bigger-picture perspective. We’ve had so many perspective-changing moments this year. There is very little of which we are in control. So, we are all just trying to work through it one day at a time.”

Speaking of Elsa, she was to go to Korea in March during her spring break from nursing school. She may still go in May when the semester of on-line clinical rotations end. But this is what it will entail: Going straight from the airport to a government-testing facility where she will get a test and be held for eight to 10 hours until results come back. From there to two-week quarantine. If she gets a government exemption, she might be able to quarantine in Sampson’s apartment, though Sampson would probably have to move elsewhere during the whole process. If not, she goes to a government facility.

That’s all a best-case scenario. There is still no guarantee the KBO season will even start. Despite all the protocols in place, if a player or staff member does test positive for COVID-19, the league shuts down for a minimum of two weeks.

Living day to day

What happens after that?

“There are still a lot of unknowns,” Sampson says. “But we are getting more information every day. I think the KBO is setting a really good example for what should be done.”

In the meantime, Sampson just keeps living day by day. He rides his scooter to and from the stadium, and that’s mostly what constitutes getting out.

He had been looking forward to exploring Korean culture as he’s got a little bit of wanderlust. In November, on a lark, he booked a last-minute trip to Spain for Elsa and him. They spent two weeks completely winging it on accommodations. They had the time of their lives. Spain has been one of the hardest hit countries by the virus.

In Korea, a big night out is if he and teammate Dan Straily, a former major league starter who like Sampson is trying to work his way back, can get a burger together. Their temperature is checked, however, before they enter any restaurant.

The rest of the time, he’s playing video games or watching Ozark. He’s already done Tiger King.

“Friends is now on Netflix in Korea, so that’s a game-changer for me,” Sampson says.

And, most of all, there is baseball. This coming week teams will start traveling to games, though there are no overnight trips scheduled.

“This is going to be a good test,” he says.

A good test? He’s already endured a life’s worth of them in four months.

Find more of The Dallas Morning News’ coverage of the coronavirus here.

Find more Rangers stories from The News here.