Good evening, and welcome to our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. These are the main stories on Friday 10 April.

NSW minister resigns after fine for breaching public health order

Don Harwin, the NSW arts minister, was fined $1,000 for breaching the state’s coronavirus public health order. It emerged on Thursday that Harwin had been living at his million-dollar Central Coast holiday home, which is more than an hour’s drive from his east Sydney primary residence. The minister resigned on Friday night, after the premier, Gladys Berejiklian, had earlier said she wanted to establish the facts.

Doubt cast over NRL’s return

A day after the NRL revealed it intended to restart the competition on 28 May, the league’s plans showed signs of unravelling. First, Brad Hazzard, NSW’s health minister, said he had not been consulted on league’s plan to resume play in seven weeks’ time.

But while Hazzard said he was willing to discuss the matter with the NRL, the deputy chief medical officer, Paul Kelly, warned the league would need permission from authorities and expressed his concern over the risks of returning to action too soon.

Australians warned not to travel over Easter

State governments are taking a hard line against people looking to travel over the Easter holidays, with police patrolling routes to popular getaways, and employing helicopters and number plate technology to catch those flouting social distancing laws. On Friday, Tasmanian police confirmed they had already ordered a number of people to turn their cars around after they were intercepted travelling from their home to a holiday house. Police have the powers to issue fines to people who breach social distancing rules.

Queensland highlights ‘Covid-19 hot spots’ in NSW

Authorities in Queensland have stepped up border measures to contain the spread of Covid-19 in the sunshine state. The state’s chief medical officer posted a list of “Covid-19 hot spots” in NSW. Anyone who returns to the state from those locations will be forced to quarantine for 14 days. It marks the first time Australians have been required to quarantine for travelling for a specific part of the country.

Chef Pete Evans’ recipe to treat Covid condemned

The Australian Medical Association dismissed as a “fancy light machine” a device that Pete Evans has suggested could be used to treat coronavirus. Evans, a celebrity chef and television host, was selling the BioCharger NG Subtle Energy Platform on his website. He said on a livestream that the machine had “a thousand different recipes and a couple on there for coronavirus. The AMA and Royal Australian College of General Practitioners condemned Evans on Friday.

Hard-pressed GPs face rent reduction requests from pathology giants

GPs practices are under pressure to accept a 50% reduction in rental payments from major pathology corporations. It follows news that doctor-owned general practices are on the brink of financial collapse due to revenue losses from Covid-19. Doctors said they felt pressured to accept the lease reduction request or face an early termination of their lease.

What you need to know: get the most important information from some of our key explainers

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian’s global network.