Handcrafted by boat builders and stone masons, this beachfront Bolinas home is for sale

The beachfront property at 8 Ocean in Bolinas is a stunning mid-century home handcrafted by a collection of Sausalito boat builders and artisans in 1958. The unique home just hit the market for $4.75 million. The beachfront property at 8 Ocean in Bolinas is a stunning mid-century home handcrafted by a collection of Sausalito boat builders and artisans in 1958. The unique home just hit the market for $4.75 million. Photo: Compass Photo: Compass Image 1 of / 92 Caption Close Handcrafted by boat builders and stone masons, this beachfront Bolinas home is for sale 1 / 92 Back to Gallery

The beachfront property at 8 Ocean Avenue in Bolinas is a stunning mid-century home handcrafted by a collection of Sausalito boat builders and artisans in 1958. The unique home just hit the market for $4.75 million.

The design, that of architect Peter Rotondo, is both ahead of its time and totally timeless. Stone and wood-paneled floors and walls feature complicated patterns, resulting in a texture that catches and softens natural light. The peaked roofs with exposed beams create space as well as drama, perhaps most realized in the kitchen, a beach-front nautical cathedral (with heated floor tiles from Italy), constructed of driftwood.

And that wood is actually driftwood. The home's current owner told SFGate that, "Throughout the main rooms are unique driftwood posts and beams, hand collected from the shores of the Gualala River, tented, fumigated and beautifully finished before crafted into the house structure."

The formal dining room, which opens through a wall of glass to the garden and the Pacific Ocean beyond, features an oversized black walnut table, the work of Rob Rich and David Whelan, who also crafted the black walnut sink pictured in the gallery above.

A sprawling 3,480 square feet includes two bedrooms and four bathrooms. It also has a lower-level den equipped with a wet bar and built in window seats. This space is more like a greenhouse than a basement, surrounded as it by glass.

There's also a sauna with its own skylight and "secret compartments" in the master bedroom.

65 feet of glass sliders maximize ocean and San Francisco views, but also the sun's energy. "The floor to ceiling sliding glass windows [are] angled to prevent reflection," said the home's current owner.

Together with inset stone, those windows capture heat. The large stones that lead up to Kit Anderson's hand-carved front door continue into and under the home's interior. "These stones are a clever solar design as stones also embedded below the living room floor further absorb solar heat."

The property is a mini-estate on 3.32 acres with the main home, a retractable bridge, gardens, a 15' by 11' studio, a deck with a hot tub, and lavatory with a Peter Pan etched glass door, stained glass window and skylight and copper sink.

In front of the house near the bluff are two areas for cliff-side cocktails.

The location is on Bolinas Beach, encircled by Duxbury Reef, not far from the Bolinas Quail Refuge — and seemingly, in a world all its own.

See the complete listing for 8 Ocean here.

Anna Marie Erwert writes from both the renter and new buyer perspective, having (finally) achieved both statuses. She focuses on national real estate trends, specializing in the San Francisco Bay Area and Pacific Northwest. Follow Anna on Twitter: @AnnaMarieErwert.