Picture the journey of a baseball in the context of a pandemic.

Many pitchers lick their fingers each time they get the ball. Most do so without thinking. That same ball is then handled by the catcher or a fielder or a ballboy, or is fouled off into the stands.

Meanwhile, saliva is taking flight at home plate, on the basepaths, in the dugouts, anywhere it can hitch a ride on a sunflower-seed shell or blend with chewing tobacco on the sly.

Players spit a lot, and that presents baseball with a unique challenge among sports developing plans to return to action after the coronavirus.

“There is a lot of saliva exchanged in baseball,” said Dr. George Rutherford, a professor of epidemiology and biostatistics at the UCSF School of Medicine. “It’s like a high school dance when I think about it.”

In the midst of a pandemic, can such unsanitary behavior continue if and when baseball gets under way this year? The answer, like much else to do with sports’ resumption, is unclear.

“I think it’s going to be tough,” Rutherford said. “People who are infected are shedding large amounts of virus, baseball players are touching their faces constantly, they’re constantly spitting. I just don’t see it. All that stuff would have to stop, which is anathema. Having played catcher in baseball, I know. And it’s not like you can put rubber gloves on your throwing hand. It’s not going to work.”

MLB and the Players Association have kicked around numerous scenarios for returning to action, including one in which all 30 teams would play in Arizona. Players would quarantine to some extent for four months or more while undergoing frequent testing and following social distancing measures to every extent possible.

That last aspect is the prime concern, according to A’s team physician Dr. Allan Pont, an endocrinologist who has served as California Pacific Medical Center’s chief medical officer. Pont believes proper physical distancing cannot be maintained on the field or in the clubhouse. But, he said, if experts determine that conditions are sufficiently safe for baseball to return to action, any lack of hygiene won’t matter.

“The reality is, if they’re not infected, they can spit all they want,” Pont said. “But the fact is that there are many ways they can spread an infection in the clubhouse, on the field, in the shower, even just congratulating each other.

“It’s not pingpong; they’re just not that far apart. You’re going to get tagged, you’re going to breathe, you’re going to get up. If you can’t maintain more than 6 feet apart, you have to hope none of the players are infected.”

Oakland shortstop Marcus Semien is with Pont: If the game is safe, it can proceed even if the ball is a germ-orb.

“I don’t know how the virus works with how it stays on things,” said Semien, who also noted that balls are swapped out of play every few pitches, “but the main thing is that if we were to play, everyone would have to be tested.”

The coronavirus is believed to be able to survive for days on leather surfaces, infectious disease expert Mary E. Schmidt told the Huffington Post UK.

Catchers are the players who most notice baseball’s general lack of cleanliness. They are in the crossfire; batters step to the plate and spit, pitchers lick their fingers, then grab the ball and throw it to them. It’s a concern.

“People spit at home plate when I’m squatting and it blows in my face; that stuff happens all the time, it’s nuts,” said former A’s catcher Kurt Suzuki, part of the Nationals’ championship team last season. “Guys lick their fingers all the time; I don’t know how you’d even take precautions to stop that. If you’re thinking about not licking your fingers or not spitting, you’re not focused on the task at hand.”

All players touch their face frequently, adjusting caps, wiping their brows, putting sunglasses on and taking them off, even transmitting signs or just fidgeting. Catchers, again, are particularly at risk because they are constantly removing their masks.

“You’re telling me in Arizona, I’m sweating my butt off and I can’t touch my face? There’s no way,” Suzuki said.

Some areas of China enacted anti-spitting measures in the wake of the outbreak; were the players’ union to get on board, baseball could do the same, but those habits will be hard to quash.

“If I was a pitcher, right now I wouldn’t be going to my mouth. I could see that being a rule,” said A’s outfielder Mark Canha, who is from San Jose and played at Cal. “Are there things we can do to help? Certainly. I mean, we all pass around the same bag of seeds in regular circumstances. There are all sorts of unhygienic things we do without thinking about it. I’ve caught myself touching the ground in the outfield and then licking my hand and I’m like, ‘Ugh, why did you do that?’”

While giving an interview on The Chronicle’s A’s Plus podcast last month, Oakland closer Liam Hendriks said he absent-mindedly picked up a ball and immediately licked his fingers.

Pitchers have been among the loudest voices during the controversy over the new baseball that led to home run records being set last season. They say the ball is too slick. Going to their mouths allows pitchers to put saliva on their fingers, which improves their grip.

“All pitchers do it because the ball is so messed up,” A’s starter Chris Bassitt said. “You have to do something.”

So if pitchers need something damp to improve their feel for the ball, is there a substance that would be suitable during a public health crisis?

“What if you put hand sanitizer on the mound? That would be a good idea,” Canha said. “Maybe they could come up with a sanitizer that also provides a grip for pitchers, that would be awesome. Maybe they could put sinks in the dugout, hand-washing stations.

“I think we’re all going to come out of it being a little more health-conscious. It’s completely changing life as we know it.”

Sinks in the dugout might help keep hands clean. But they would do little to improve the cleanliness of the dugouts themselves, which are filthy by the end of a game.

“It’s pretty dirty, honestly,” Bassitt said. “Sunflower seeds, (spit) cups everywhere. Things are messy.”

“It’s disgusting,” Pont said.

Cleaning crews hose everything down nightly; they often do so several times before games, too. Locker areas and showers are scoured daily, and when the A’s are on the road, the Coliseum’s clubhouse level occasionally gets an industrial-strength disinfectant steam cleaning.

“I think baseball does a good job — every hotel we go to, every clubhouse, is really clean,” Bassitt said. “Do the players keep it clean? The answer is kind of no. You have to give it to the clubhouse people, they do a great job with cleanliness, but the players can definitely improve. This has shown that.”

A’s manager Bob Melvin is, famously, a germophobe who keeps an enormous container of Purell in the dugout — “BoMel was way ahead of the rest of us,” Bassitt said — and he agrees baseball could come out of its hiatus with better overall hygiene, required or not.

“I think this ordeal will definitely make players think twice, create a whole different perspective on that,” Melvin said. “That’ll work itself out, I think. It better, because you could be affecting everyone else who touches the ball.”

Susan Slusser is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: sslusser@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @susanslusser