The Warriors were so much messier than we realized

OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA - JUNE 07: Stephen Curry #30, Draymond Green #23 and Klay Thompson #11 of the Golden State Warriors react against the Toronto Raptors in the second half during Game Four of the 2019 NBA Finals at ORACLE Arena on June 07, 2019 in Oakland, California. NOTE TO USER: User expressly acknowledges and agrees that, by downloading and or using this photograph, User is consenting to the terms and conditions of the Getty Images License Agreement. (Photo by Ezra Shaw/Getty Images) less OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA - JUNE 07: Stephen Curry #30, Draymond Green #23 and Klay Thompson #11 of the Golden State Warriors react against the Toronto Raptors in the second half during Game Four of the 2019 NBA ... more Photo: Ezra Shaw/Getty Images Photo: Ezra Shaw/Getty Images Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close The Warriors were so much messier than we realized 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Welcome to the Two-Minute Drill, where we fill you in on all things Bay Area sports in a handy newsletter you can read in under two minutes.

More newsletters | More sports

For a while, it felt like the Warriors were something completely novel: a dominant sports team with a refreshing lack of ego or internal conflict. This was back in, say, 2015, during their first title run. Sure, Draymond Green and Steve Kerr would get into it from time to time, but most spectators were largely impressed with the way they seemed to play with such joy.

In Ethan Strauss's new book "Victory Machine: The Making and Unmaking of the Warriors Dynasty," it becomes clear that the Warriors were never as harmonious as it seemed... READ MORE

Recommended Video:

Three links:

1) A's minor league manager off ventilator in coronavirus fight (Associated Press)

2) NFL star Von Miller has COVID-19, is in good spirits (Associated Press)

3) Column: Navigating a world without sports or advertising isn’t easy (The Athletic)

The Two-Minute-Drill is curated by Michael Rosen. Sign up for the newsletter here and contact Michael at michael.rosen@sfgate.com.