A conservative group is taking a swipe at freshman Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (D-N.Y.) for her role played in Amazon ditching their new headquarters plans in her state, adding to the continued criticism from others.

On a billboard in New York City, Job Creators Network (JCN) is putting the self-described Democratic socialist on blast over Amazon’s pullout.

“25,000 lost NYC jobs, $4 billion in lost wages, $12 billion in lost economic activity for NY,” the billboard reads. “Thanks for nothing, AOC!”

JCN’s president and CEO Alfredo Ortiz said on Wednesday, “The Amazon pullout is a perfect example of what we’ve been saying: socialism takes and capitalism creates.”

“The economic consequences of the HQ2 termination gives America a small taste of the harm that is to come if Ocasio-Cortez’s anti-business canon comes to fruition and is made federal policy,” Ortiz added.

Check out the billboard below:

Check out the sign in Times Sq.! ⁦Thanks to @JobCreatorsUSA⁩! pic.twitter.com/iIN0DTo8r2 — Laura Ingraham (@IngrahamAngle) February 20, 2019

Amazon pulled the plug after several left-leaning politicians were opposed to the deal.

Ocasio-Cortez celebrated the decision, and now, she’s defending her role, claiming the deal was “one of the biggest giveaways in state history,” as IJR Red reported.

The Democrat’s vocal defense about Amazon’s pullout has put her under fire from even members of her own party.

During a recent CNN interview, Rep. Carolyn Maloney (D-N.Y.) ripped into her fellow Democrat colleague for “protesting jobs.”

“It used to be that we would protest wars. Now, we’re protesting jobs?” Maloney said.

Democratic New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio also laid into Ocasio-Cortez’s claim the city was giving away $3 billion to Amazon.

“[…] And that $3 billion that would go back in tax incentives was only after we were getting the jobs and getting the revenue,” Blasio said during an NBC News interview, adding, “There’s no money — right.”

Blasio’s comments come after Ocasio-Cortez said now that the deal is off, the $3 billion could be invested into the district — it’s unclear if the freshman representative fully understood the economics with the Amazon deal when she became so vocal about it.

The billboard’s message will be on view to the public through Wednesday.

Published in