Transcript for Rep. Amash stands his ground on Trump impeachment

President from those defined. Democrats and Republicans pretty. From what I'm Lian where black community. That sharp is America went line Republicans incumbent. And so much when he's doing its job and here. And you're dame and I you know. It Damon. Are something that you know is not true. It's just bewildering to me that you can treat the president of the United States. Inspect north such a good job. Minorities and black. So. I suspect there will be a lot of people who disagree with you on that. And and nobody is demonizing him higher read a report and it might cents. And about the job representative. The person who demonize people every day is now. He goes on sweater. And calls people names. And those involved egregious things about people. And somehow if anyone challenges any policy positions he has are says there's something in the Mueller report that we should look at. That somehow attacking him argument that's that's you know. On Saturday or whoever would recognize they. I don't think anyone would think that that is. Are reasonable position. He's the one demonizing people he's going attack. And I don't think that's what people want in their elected officials. Not hoping for arc in our country. Or people to hatred toward each other for people to be angry at each other every day. I think. The economy we've very well. And you know I think the president deserves some credit for that reports. And make about how well things are going through the economy and it's still so. Why is that. Why are people so angry with each other when things are going pretty well economically. And I think it's because of the tone we're setting at the top. We are not treating with each other with respect. And we need to bring that back we need to treat each other with love and respect. And we don't have that right now. And and if there's if there's one thing. I pray and hope our country is that will lobby each other care about each other regardless of our backgrounds and different sets. Because this kind of division is dangerous and it destroys liberty.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.