Washington, D.C., may be a long way away from the Wild West, but two dozen real-life wranglers just brought the cowboy spirit to the nation’s capital.

In a demonstration to show support for President Donald Trump and raise awareness for the border security issue, a group of conservatives completed a week-long horseback ride through winter weather to march — or is that clop? — to the White House from the historic Cumberland area of Maryland.

“Friday’s arrival concluded an eight-day ride from Cumberland, Maryland, that began on Feb. 15, the same day President Donald Trump declared a national emergency along the U.S.-Mexico border,” reported WTOP Radio in Washington.

“The start day wasn’t a coincidence for the group: They decided to depart the day of the announcement to support Trump’s decision,” the station explained.

TRENDING: Pentagon: ABC's 'Bombshell' Report that Trump Admin Knew About Coronavirus in November 'Not Correct'

Carrying American flags and blue Trump banners, the riders covered about 25 miles per day along the C&O Canal towpath for much of their journey, braving cold temperatures to travel through a part of the country once surveyed by George Washington himself.

The aptly named “Cowboys for Trump” was organized by Couy Griffin, a resident of New Mexico who says he’s seen the problems with the unsecured southern border firsthand.

“We’re directly affected in New Mexico by the border situation,” Griffin said. “We support the president through the actions that he’s taken as far as securing our border.”

Many establishment media outlets and of course politicians on the left have insisted that Trump is low on support for his emergency declaration, which takes pre-appropriated funds and redirects them to boost security along U.S.-Mexico problem areas.

Has the left underestimated the grassroots support for Trump on the border issue? Yes No Completing this poll entitles you to The Western Journal news updates free of charge. You may opt out at anytime. You also agree to our Privacy Policy and Terms of Use You're logged in to Facebook. Click here to log out. 99% (1591 Votes) 1% (15 Votes)

But the dedication of supporters like Griffin suggests that the president may have grassroots backing for his plan.

“I am just out here to support the Cowboys for Trump. I believe in the cause. I believe in our president,” said Kina Davis, a Maryland farm owner who donated the use of the horses ridden by the cowboys.

Others donated as well. Some $18,000 was raised via GoFundMe to allow dozens of supporters to fly out from border states to make the symbolic ride on behalf of pro-Trump voices.

One of them is Wolf Portugal, a Native American who told WTOP that he believes his ancestors would have supported a security wall as well.

“I can safely say if the Native American Indian could build walls, they would have built them,” he declared.

RELATED: Country Legend Charlie Daniels Absolutely Savages Out-of-Touch Pelosi - 'You Just Don't Give a Damn'

Contrary to the frequent portrayal of Trump supporters in the media, organizers said they weren’t anti-immigrant, but simply wanted the laws followed.

“We want to welcome immigrants to come into our country, but they have to go through the legal processes,” said Griffin, who helped organize the event.

“We rode through some pretty severe weather, as far as snow and ice.”

Trump is known for his now-iconic campaign hats, and the “Cowboys for Trump” decided to bring him one with a unique design. One member of the group made a custom cowboy hat for the commander in chief, although they have not yet been able to give it to him personally.

Whether Trump ultimately prevails in his emergency border declaration and inevitable court challenges remains to be seen, but the fact that supporters are so fired up over illegal immigration shows that the issue isn’t going away any time soon.

The president won largely by promising to fix the border crisis. That’s proving to be easier said than done, but underestimating him or his grassroots supporters’ dedication to the wall would probably be a losing bet.

We are committed to truth and accuracy in all of our journalism. Read our editorial standards.