President Donald Trump has vetoed a congressional resolution to end America's involvement in the Saudi-led war in Yemen.

In a statement to the Senate on Tuesday, the Commander-in-chief called the resolution 'an unnecessary, dangerous attempt to weaken his constitutional authorities'.

The resolution, which would have required Trump to cease giving military assistance to Saudi Arabia, passed the House of Representatives in April and the Senate in March.

It marked the first time both chambers of Congress had supported a War Powers resolution, limiting the president's ability to send troops into action.

President Donald Trump vetoed a congressional resolution to end America's involvement in the Saudi-led war in Yemen

The U.S. has provided intelligence and logistical support to the Saudis since 2015

Yemen's civil war pits the Saudi-led coalition against Houthi rebels backed by Iran.

The U.S. has provided intelligence and logistical support to the Saudis since 2015.

In his statement vetoing the resolution, Trump called such support 'limited' and argued that it has not 'introduced United States military personnel into hostilities.'

He stated continued involvement was also necessary to 'protect the safety of the more than 80,000 Americans who reside in certain coalition countries.'

On Tuesday, several Democrats expressed their disappointment after Trump vetoed the congressional resolution.

'From a president elected on the promise of putting a stop to our endless wars, this veto is a painful missed opportunity,' California Congressman Ro Khanna said in a statement.

2020 Democratic candidate Bernie Sanders expressed a similar sentiment, writing: 'I am disappointed, but not surprised, that Trump has rejected the bi-partisan resolution to end U.S. involvement in the horrific war in Yemen. The people of Yemen desperately need humanitarian help, not more bombs.'

Trump claimed that U.S. support to Saudi Arabia in the conflict was 'limited'

Critics of the Saudi-led bombing campaign in Yemen say the situation in the country is only getting worse

Critics of the Saudi-led bombing campaign in Yemen say the situation in the country is only getting worse.

The conflict has killed tens of thousands of people and spawned what the United Nations calls the world's most dire humanitarian crisis, with the country on the brink of famine.

Tuesday's veto was the second of Trump's presidency.

Just last month he overrode a congressional resolution that aimed to reverse the national emergency he declared in order to obtain funding for wall at the Mexican border.