One of the big questions, alongside the one about universal healthcare, that Democrats will be pressed to answer in the lead-up to 2020 is the one about reproductive health rights for women. Donald Trump made a giant show of talking about how evil liberals are and fearmongering for his rally crowds by saying that Democrats want to rip viable fetuses out of women in their ninth month of pregnancy, an inaccurate and inane description of third-trimester abortions.

At Penn State today, Beto was asked about his defense of third-trimester abortion. He doubled down: “I think those decisions are best left to a woman and her doctor. I know better than to assume anything about a woman’s decision . . . when it comes her to reproductive rights.” pic.twitter.com/3JNecJJni0 — Alexandra DeSanctis (@xan_desanctis) March 19, 2019

The debate raged on for a short while afterward until Trump said something even more false and ridiculous; in other words, the debate didn’t last long until the country was on to other topics. At that point, however, Trump had done his conspiracy theory-spreading, Democrats are the devil-spinning job. The right is completely convinced that most women, if allowed to do so, can find a doctor who will abort their perfectly health fetuses within days of their birth on command.

On Tuesday, candidate Beto O’Rourke was asked, specifically, about his feelings on third-trimester abortions.

‘I think those decisions are best left to a woman and her doctor. I know better than to assume anything about a woman’s decision . . . when it comes her to reproductive rights.’

He let the questioner, a right-wing pundit from the National Review, know that he “trusts” women to make the right decisions about their bodies and their pregnancies. It was the right answer. Women are not having gruesome abortion procedures in their 37th week of pregnancy because they’ve changed their minds about having a baby. The Trumpsters love a good, gruesome gore story, though, so their heads collectively exploded on Twitter.

Science just is not and never will be their forte. Read just a few of their insane comments below:

Featured image via Flickr by Erik Drost under a Creative Commons license