House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyMcCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Freedom Caucus chair calls for GOP to reject additional funds for state, local governments Top Republican voices skepticism of rule change to allow remote voting MORE (R-Calif.) said Friday he would support adding funding for hospitals to a package intended to help small businesses in a new sign the partisan debate over the next phase of coronavirus legislation may be easing.

McCarthy said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that he would support adding money strictly for hospitals on top of an additional $250 billion for the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), a small-business loan program that ran out of funds Thursday.

“Hospitals need the help. Hospitals are the modern-day soldiers,” McCarthy said. “I’d like to see money in there — money in the PPP and money in hospitals — that would be a very smart move right now.”

ADVERTISEMENT

The comments mark the latest development in the battle over how to tackle the next round of relief legislation.

Republicans have for weeks sought to pass a “clean” bill that strictly injects another $250 billion into the PPP, while Democrats want to tack on another $100 billion for hospitals and $150 billion for state and local governments.

President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE appeared to give Republicans some cover Friday to budge on funding for hospitals in the next package.

“Hospitals have been decimated by this,” Trump said at a press conference. “I’m with that all the way. If they want to add hospitals, we could also add it into phase four, if we do a phase four.”

McCarthy told the Journal he discussed the concept of pairing the hospital funding with the small business aid with Trump at the White House on Thursday.

ADVERTISEMENT

Democrats, who have largely been negotiating with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin Steven Terner MnuchinMcCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package 13 things to know for today on coronavirus On The Money: Millions wait for virus relief checks in major test for IRS | Senate misses deadline to replenish small-business loan program | Fresh produce goes to waste as coronavirus snarls supply chains MORE, have indicated thus far that they are set on including both the hospital and state and local funding in the next coronavirus relief package. However, it was not immediately clear if they would consider McCarthy’s proposal to include just hospital funding.

Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiLady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Trump criticizes Pelosi over stalemate on small business loan funds MORE (D-Calif.) indicated Friday night that Democrats may not be satisfied just with extra funds for hospitals, noting that other first responders also need more money.

"Now in the implementation, there is need for more money. We subscribe to that, we want to have more money for small business, we believe in that," she said on MSNBC. "But it is also important to have funds for those on the front lines, the health care workers, the police and fire, EMS folks and all those who really need help as they try to save lives.

"So we're hoping that we can come to an agreement," she added.

Updated: 9:55 p.m.