Larry Kudlow is director of the White House National Economic Council. (Photo by NICHOLAS KAMM/AFP via Getty Images)

(CNSNews.com) - "I mean heck, I want people to go back to work," Larry Kudlow, one of President Trump's top economic advisers, told Fox News's Sean Hannity Thursday night.

On the same program, the always colorful Sen. John Kennedy (R-La.) warned that "the tofu and arugula crowd are not going to like the president's plan" to reopen the country.

"They think that we should leave the economy shut down until there is no more coronavirus," Kennedy said.

"That's not realistic for two reasons. No, it's unrealistic. It’s bone-deep, down-to-the-marrow stupid. Number one, the economy will collapse, the world economy will collapse if ours does. And number two, as we saw in Michigan, the American people are not going to stand for it.”

Kudlow said the unemployment and GDP numbers are "going to be pretty awful" for the months of April.

The important thing here is the president's guidelines, with the doctors giving us a pathway to reopening the economy. We have to be safe. We have to be healthy...We’ve got to have the right testing we’ve got to have the right diagnostics, we’ve got to have the right hospitalization, all that should be in place. We have to practice best-practicing for social distancing and so forth and so on. But the key point is, we've laid out a pathway, a guideline, for all the state governors across the country who will then begin to reopen the economy. It will be done in phases. May will be a transition month, but this thing will get us back on track. I mean the economy. Look, in the last four weeks, the numbers are very painful because they have hardship written all over them. Unemployment insurance claims, Sean, went up 22 million in the last four weeks. That's about 13.5 percent of the whole labor force. It's a terrible number, no question. But – but, but, but – now, with these new guidelines and as we gradually reopen, phase by phase, state-by-state, we will see a turnaround in the economy in the weeks ahead. I truly believe that.

Kudlow predicted the rebound will come "in the next few weeks."

"A rebound will come, and this is a big first step by President Trump."