President Donald Trump met with Vietnamese Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc in Hanoi on Wednesday. Trump and Vietnamese officials signed trade deals worth more than $21 billion. | Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images NORTH KOREA NUCLEAR SUMMIT Vietnam backs Trump on working toward North Korea’s denuclearization

President Donald Trump and Vietnam President Nguyen Phu Trong on Wednesday agreed to continue to work toward the denuclearization of North Korea, ahead of Trump’s meeting with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, the White House said.

Trump thanked the Vietnamese president and Prime Minister Nguyen Xuan Phuc for their country’s “generosity and partnership in hosting his meeting with Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Chairman Kim Jong Un.”

Advertisement

“The leaders agreed on the need for continued progress toward the final, fully verified denuclearization of the DPRK,” press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said in a statement about the first day of Trump’s visit to Hanoi.

In addition, the leaders discussed ways to strengthen the United States-Vietnam Comprehensive Partnership, which was launched by former President Barack Obama.

Sanders said the two countries’ relationship could be improved by deepening political, security, economic and people-to-people ties, and through cooperation on humanitarian and legacy of war issues, presumably referring to matters still unresolved from the Vietnam War.

Trump and the Vietnamese president also discussed trade issues, with the U.S. president signing trade deals that are worth more than $21 billion.

The agreements include the purchase of 100 Boeing 737-Max jets and 215 GE/CFM joint venture engines by VietJet, and 10 Boeing 787-9 jets by Bamboo Airways. Vietnam Airlines will purchase $100 million in services and technology from Sabre Corp.

Sanders said, “The leaders also committed to promoting a free and open Indo-Pacific with shared principles of respect for sovereignty, peaceful resolution of disputes in accordance with international law, and freedom of navigation and overflight” and “celebrated 30 years of cooperation on POW/MIA accounting missions.”