Fire has held a certain mystical power in the human mind since Prometheus stole it from the gods. When it burns down the spire of Notre Dame—one of Christendom’s great churches, resting at the heart of the French nation—the emotional effect can be tremendous.

Parisians and the world watched in horror on Monday as flames devoured much of the ancient cathedral, though it spared its iconic twin bell towers and most of the external stone structure. The cause appears to be accidental, according to Paris officials. The cathedral’s upper levels were built in the twelfth and thirteenth century with a “forest” of ancient oak trees, which became the kindling for Monday’s conflagration. Scaffolding and construction equipment on the roof may have provided the spark to ignite it. This mundane hypothesis doesn’t detract from the shock of watching an eight-century-old cultural landmark go up in flames.

Into that psychic void rushed numerous observers and commentators who sought to find a more profound meaning from the blaze, notably by tying it to the social unrest and political discord in France today. It’s human to try to find sweeping answers to seemingly random events. In their search for deeper truths, however, these analysts may have missed a conclusion that is more superficial—yet more significant.

President Emmanuel Macron has spent the last few months struggling to address the Yellow Vest movement, which has led waves of protests and riots against his unpopular economic policies. He had planned to deliver an address to the French people on Monday night to outline his latest response to the turmoil, but as news of the fire broke, he canceled those plans and rushed to the scene, vowing to rebuild the ancient cathedral. The fire “seemed to underscore the challenges heaped before his administration, which has struggled to reconcile the formidable weight of France’s ideals and storied past with the necessity for change to meet the demands of the 21st century,” The New York Times reported in its main story on the blaze.

