Several Fox News hosts, including Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity, are lashing out at Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in response to her Monday remark that the threat of climate change is causing "young people to have a legitimate question: Is it OK to still have children?"

The Fox News host Steve Hilton called it "fascistic" and a "no-child policy."

Ocasio-Cortez called the criticism a deliberate mischaracterization of her ideas. "GOP knows our actual proposals are popular, grounded, + difficult to refute, so instead they invent hysteric kiddie versions to make it easier for themselves," she tweeted.

Several Fox News hosts, including Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity, are lashing out at Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in response to her Monday remark that the threat of climate change is causing "young people to have a legitimate question: Is it OK to still have children?"

Ocasio-Cortez asked the question on Monday on Instagram Live.

"Our planet is going to hit disaster if we don't turn this ship around ... there's scientific consensus that the lives of children are going to be very difficult," Ocasio-Cortez said as she chopped a sweet potato in her Bronx kitchen. "And even if you don't have kids, there are still children here in the world, and we have a moral obligation to leave a better world for them."

For some would-be parents, climate change is a consideration. In a 2018 New York Times survey, 11% of respondents said they "didn't want children or weren't sure" because they were "worried about climate change," and 33% said they were having fewer children than they ideally wanted because of climate-change worries. The New York Times survey, which was administered by Morning Consult, is based on responses from 1,858 men and women ages 20 to 45.

On Tuesday, the Fox News host Steve Hilton, a conservative former UK political operative, called Ocasio-Cortez's comment, and her broader political agenda, "disturbingly authoritarian, even fascistic." He suggested the New York progressive was having a mental breakdown.

Read more: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez hits back at Fox News after a host slams her 'living wage' for staffers as 'socialism and communism'

"Honestly, I don't know whether she's having some kind of nervous breakdown, or whether all we're seeing now is the true ugliness of her ideology being revealed," Hilton said on Fox's "Outnumbered" on Tuesday afternoon.

Hilton and others on the network said the 29-year-old lawmaker is demanding that Americans stop having children and submit to "civilizational suicide."

"She'd be much more comfortable, frankly, in China, where this approach to politics — it fits much better with the brutal authoritarian regime over there," Hilton said, adding that he's "really frightened" by Ocasio-Cortez's rhetoric.

"She's saying, 'don't have kids' because it's going to hurt our country," "Fox & Friends" host Pete Hegseth said on Tuesday. "So if you don't believe in kids, and families, and the flag, then you're effectively admitting to civilizational suicide."

Carlson, the controversial prime-time Fox News host, responded sarcastically to Ocasio-Cortez's question.

"Is it okay to still have children? Well I don't know, Alexandria. You're the boss now — if you say we can't reproduce, of course we won't, it's your call," he said.

They also attacked Ocasio-Cortez's ambitious proposal to fight climate change, known as the Green New Deal, which calls for a 10-year mobilization to decarbonize the economy, the implementation of a federal jobs-guarantee program, and universal healthcare and housing.

Melissa Francis, another "Outnumbered" host, referred to a document Ocasio-Cortez's office released and later retracted, in which she called for the eventual elimination of cows and airplanes. Ocasio-Cortez has since clarified that she's not advocating for an elimination of beef and air travel, but she hopes one day they'll become largely unnecessary.

"So let's tally it up: She wants to get rid of children, airplanes, and cows," Francis said.

Ocasio-Cortez responded to the criticism on Tuesday evening, accusing the Fox hosts of deliberately mischaracterizing her policies.

"I understand difference of opinion, but dark distortions of position help no one," she tweeted. "GOP knows our actual proposals are popular, grounded, + difficult to refute, so instead they invent hysteric kiddie versions to make it easier for themselves. I bet most haven't even read the GND."