F

or decades, scientists and entrepreneurs have fantasized about creating lab-grown spider silk, which is renowned for its strength and softness. Slowly, a few companies have emerged that are able to do it. AMSilk, a German company founded in 2008, is one of them. After completing the laborious process of turning academic research on growing spider silk proteins in E. coli bacteria into a commercial operation, AMSilk is selling its bio-based products as a replacement for traditional silk additives in cosmetics and as a coating for breast implants.

During a recent visit by Forbes to AMSilk’s offices in the suburban Munich town of Planegg, cofounder and chief science officer Lin Römer took items out of a corner cabinet to show them off. There were silk sprays, breathable nail polishes and even a watch band that the company developed recently with the luxury brand Omega, which will be sold in limited-edition quantity. “The long-term vision is to make many products for everyday use,” Römer says.

Spider silk without the spiders: AMSilk CEO Jens Klein (left) and chief science officer Lin Römer; a flask of silk powder; a prototype shoe for Adidas.

Unlike silkworms, spiders can’t be farmed, because they are territorial and cannibalistic. Proponents of growing spider silk in a lab hope to get the advantages of its strength and softness and also to have an alternative to silkworm silk, which requires the death of thousands of silkworm cocoons. They also hope that lab-grown silk, which is biodegradable, can ultimately replace materials like polyester that are made with petrochemicals and harm the environment. “We all know that to use crude oil to make polyester and throw it in the ocean where it will be for thousands of years is not the best way to go,” Römer says.

A core of AMSilk’s business is selling its lab-grown silk gels and powders to cosmetics companies, which use silk additives to give skin products their glow and shampoo its shine. Along with more than $30 million in funding, this gives it the cash flow to pursue riskier projects, such as a deal it signed last year with Airbus to develop a new high-performance material that would incorporate its silk fiber. That’s a lower-key approach than its venture capital-funded American competitor Bolt Threads, which has been focused on the higher-profile textile market.

Industry is extremely interested in new and innovative materials, says Jens Klein, AMSilk’s CEO, who previously worked for chemical company Evonik Industries. “Spider silk,” he says, “has long been the holy grail of material innovation.”

Reach Amy Feldman at afeldman@forbes.com.