Little did we know that Americans would be dividing themselves into Betophobes and Betophiles. We know all about what the Betophobes think. They’ve signaled their distaste for presidential candidate Beto O’Rourke in tweets, op-eds, and mocking headlines. But what about the Betophiles? They’re quiet. Some of us, this writer included, wondered if they existed outside of a narrow bubble of journalists. Imagine the surprise, then, when it emerged this week that Beto’s supporters took only 24 hours to put over $6 million in O’Rourke’s coffers, a speed record surpassing that of any Democrat in the 2020 race. It was a reminder, if we needed one, that Twitter isn’t America or Democrats, and neither is the press.

Beto O’Rourke is running on a platform that’s vague, and, for both Betophiles and Betophobes, it’s the lack of ideology that attracts or repels them. Beto told this publication, “I think it is my ability to listen to people, to help bring people together to do something that is thought to be impossible.” Of course, one reason things can be impossible is that most people don’t want them to happen. But leave that aside. Anyone who remembers 2008 will recognize the echoes of Barack Obama, who offered “unity over division” and similar promises. One lesson that should have been learned is that it’s a mistake to campaign as a unifier, because the other side will be eager to prove you wrong. But maybe Beto offers a new twist on it.

Let us move now to the other centrist white male in the 2020 race: Joe Biden. Should Biden be afraid of Beto? To be sure, the idea that “centrist white male” is a slot with insufficient room for two would have seemed odd three or four elections ago. In 2004, there was little else. (John Kerry, Howard Dean, John Edwards, Joe Lieberman, and Wesley Clark—these were seen as the leading hopefuls, and Dennis Kucinich, Al Sharpton, or Carol Moseley Braun languished on the margins.) But the elections of Barack Obama and Donald Trump—along with a strong showing by Bernie Sanders in 2016—changed people’s sense of what’s possible and what’s advantageous. Centrism and whiteness and maleness may all be liabilities more than strengths. For someone like Biden, therefore, a young and charismatic candidate borrowing a lot of the Obama vibe is a hazard, making a tough hand worse. Biden can at best offer Obama continuity. He cannot offer the vibe.

You could say that Biden has many of Beto’s centrist vulnerabilities along with extra liabilities: a longer record, less wokeness fluency, and a tendency, in the words of Barack Obama, “to say something stupid.” On the last of these points, Biden told a crowd over the weekend that he had “the most progressive record of anybody running for”—stopping abruptly to change that to “anybody who would run.” If Biden is looking to play the sphinx and then wow the field by jumping in late, slips like that don’t help. One is reminded of the Far Side cartoon of an alien visitor falling down the stairs on the way to greet mankind. “So much for instilling them with a sense of awe,” reads the caption.

For all of Biden’s flaws, though, he’s still in a stronger position than Beto, because he represents a larger share of Democrats and consequently is leading every poll. That is to say, he appeals to those who love Barack Obama, hate Donald Trump, and pay scant attention to news about politics. That may not be the reader of an article like this, but it’s people we all know. Beto, by contrast, would appeal to a smaller part of Obama’s coalition: those who pay close attention to politics but not policy and loved Obama for his manner and style. This isn’t meaningless. Many Americans felt proud to have Obama representing their country to the world. The head of state sets a tone, and we feel it fast when that tone becomes appalling. But it tends to recede as a priority in the face of other problems.