House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyMcCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Freedom Caucus chair calls for GOP to reject additional funds for state, local governments Top Republican voices skepticism of rule change to allow remote voting MORE (R-Calif.) announced Friday he had selected Rep. French Hill James (French) French HillMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package GOP Rep. French Hill named to coronavirus oversight committee Pelosi to Democrats: 'Are you ready?' MORE (R-Ark.) to serve on the five-person committee charged with overseeing the Trump administration’s efforts to salvage the economy.

Hill, a third-term GOP lawmaker, is the second appointee to the congressional oversight panel created to monitor how President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE, the Treasury Department and Federal Reserve dole out billions in economic rescue authorized by the $2.2 trillion coronavirus stimulus bill signed by the president last month.

A former banker, Hill was a deputy assistant Treasury secretary from 1989 to 1991 under former President George H.W. Bush, briefly overlapping with Fed Chairman Jerome Powell before joining the White House. Hill currently serves as the ranking member of the House Financial Services subcommittee overseeing national security and international development.

ADVERTISEMENT

“French has been a leader serving his constituents in Arkansas and our nation as Congress crafted the most ambitious relief package in history,” McCarthy said in a Friday statement, praising his “important expertise that will guide his advocacy of immediate and effective solutions for the American people struggling from the despair during this crisis.”

Hill will be among four other appointees tasked with overseeing how the Treasury Department and Fed deploys $500 billion in industry-specific rescue funds and emergency loans to businesses facing peril because of the coronavirus.

Hill joins Bharat Ramamurti, a former aide to Sen. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth WarrenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move McConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (D-Mass.) appointed to the committee by Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Stacey Abrams throws support behind vote-by-mail efforts Former MSNBC host explains why UBI is a ventilator for U.S. economy in a crisis MORE (D-N.Y.), as the only other current member of the panel.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiLady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Trump criticizes Pelosi over stalemate on small business loan funds MORE (D-Calif.) and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse GOP Rep. French Hill named to coronavirus oversight committee MORE (R-Ky.) must each appoint another person to the committee and agree together on a chairman. The panel is structured similarly to the congressional committee that oversaw the 2008 bank bailout.