Julian Assange, the controversial WikiLeaks founder. “There has been a lot of misquoting of me and WikiLeaks publications.” Called a villain by some. “That villain Julian Assange.” “He should be extradited to face justice here.” “I’m pleased to see him arrested.” And a hero by others. [Chanting] “Free the truth! Free Assange! “Don’t shoot the messenger!” Some on the left have embraced Assange for years, seeing him as a free-speech martyr. “As WikiLeaks stands under threats, so does the freedom of expression and the health of all our societies.” And Republicans, they have long considered Assange a Putin stooge who spilled America’s biggest secrets. As for President Trump, he now claims to know nothing. “I know nothing about WikiLeaks. It’s not my thing.” But he used to gush over Assange’s organization “WikiLeaks, I love WikiLeaks!” Here’s how such a divisive figure has become a vessel for people across the political spectrum. “I’ve always wanted to say, ‘We are all individuals!’” “We are all individuals!” One of Assange’s fiercest supporters is former “Baywatch” star and animal rights activist Pamela Anderson. She visited Assange at the Ecuadorean embassy in London, where he lived for seven years. “He’s so funny and he’s very kind and he’s very smart. He’s brilliant, and we talk about everything. I’m there for four hours at a time. And I see him all the time.” Anderson is a rumored lover of Assange’s and even wrote him poetry. Another fan? Fashion designer Vivienne Westwood, who has brought her support for Assange to the runway. “We sell these T-shirts, and I was able to give him £3,000 recently for some of the T-shirts we sold to help toward WikiLeaks.” And then there is Lady Gaga. “It’s pretty heavy It’s pretty heavy stuff.” She stopped by the embassy in 2012 and interviewed Assange. “You may be an enemy of the state, but you are not an enemy of humanity.” But this icon of left-leaning celebrities has also been embraced by white supremacist David Duke, who thanked him for a dump of Clinton campaign emails that may have helped Donald Trump. He tweeted: “God bless WikiLeaks. Julian Assange is a hero.” And the same leak made Assange a pariah to certain Democrats. “He has to answer for what he has done.” In a sign of how far Assange’s image has swung, there’s Fox commentator Sean Hannity. Hannity used to be a hater. “Assange is apparently not done waging his war against the U.S.” And now? “You look at WikiLeaks’s record, they’ve never printed a single thing proven untrue in like 12 years. Not one!” Friend at times, foe at others. Assange has inspired head-spinning adoration from both the left and the right. Yet his anti-establishment agenda has made Assange elusive, allowing him to be everything to everyone.