U.K. Prime Minister Theresa May will ask Brussels to delay Britain’s scheduled exit from the European Union, despite senior EU officials casting doubts over whether an extension to the timetable can be agreed.

May will travel to the Belgian capital on Thursday with little to offer the other 27 EU countries, which must unanimously agree to postpone the U.K.’s exit from the bloc. British parliamentarians voted last week against leaving the EU without a deal in place on Mah 29.

Ministers expect the Prime Minister to ask for the planned Brexit date to be moved out to June 30, with an option of requesting a longer delay left on the table. If a long extension is agreed, the U.K. would have to take part in the European elections in May and continue its role in EU decision making.

Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator, raised concerns on Tuesday about the delay.

“An extension will be something that extends uncertainty and that uncertainty has a cost. We can’t do it without having a good reason for it,” Barnier said after a meeting of ministers in Brussels. “EU leaders will need a concrete plan in order to be able to make an informed decision.”

Barnier said any request from the Prime Minister for a longer extension would need to be based on “a new political process” in the U.K., the Financial Times reported. That could be interpreted as a reference to a general election, a second referendum or a new cross-party initiative.

The Prime Minister canvassed opinion from cabinet on a Brexit delay on Tuesday evening, once again exposing the stark divisions within her senior leadership team. Eight Eurosceptic ministers argued that any extension should last no longer than June 30, according the Financial Times, adding that Britain should be prepared to leave the EU without a deal at this point.

May sought to schedule a third vote on her revised Brexit deal this week, after it was rejected for a second time by 149 votes. However, Commons Speaker John Bercow scuppered those plans on Monday by announcing that she would not be able to hold a vote again without making substantial changes to her preferred agreement.