On Monday morning, President Trump directed his 59 million followers’ attention to a new poll that found that the American people are increasingly agreeing with him that Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s ongoing investigation into Russian interference and potential “collusion” with the Trump campaign is a “witch hunt.”

“Wow! A Suffolk/USA Today Poll, just out, states, ‘50% of Americans AGREE that Robert Mueller’s investigation is a Witch Hunt.’ @MSNBC,” Trump tweeted. “Very few think it is legit! We will soon find out?”

Wow! A Suffolk/USA Today Poll, just out, states, “50% of Americans AGREE that Robert Mueller’s investigation is a Witch Hunt.” @MSNBC Very few think it is legit! We will soon find out? — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 18, 2019

Trump is referencing a new poll that found that more Americans than ever now agree with Trump that the Mueller probe is a “witch hunt.”

A USA Today/Suffolk University Poll published Monday morning found that 50% of Americans now say “they agree with Trump’s assertion that the special counsel’s investigation is a ‘witch hunt’ and that he has been subjected to more investigations than previous presidents because of politics,” USA Today reports. Nearly half, 47 percent, disagree with that assertion; only 3 percent don’t have an opinion on the issue.

The poll found “a stark partisan divide on that question,” with nearly all, 86%, of Republicans dismissing the investigation as a “witch hunt,” while the inverse, 14%, of Democrats agree. Independents are split, with 52% agreeing it’s a witch hunt and 42% disagreeing.

The poll also found the public souring on the idea of impeaching Trump, with support for impeachment dropping 10% to just 28% since October.

As The Daily Wire’s Emily Zanotti noted in her coverage of the poll Monday, it comes “just as Democrats are setting up their spring agenda in the House of Representatives, and announcing several brand new probes into the White House, the Trump Administration, and Trump companies who did business with the Russian government and wealthy Russian individuals even before Donald Trump ran for president.”

Meanwhile, despite insiders indicating for weeks that the Mueller probe was on the verge of wrapping up, new reports suggest it might be pursuing new leads.

Trump’s rhetorical campaign against the “witch hunt” has been ramping up over recent weeks. Over the last few days, Trump has highlighted various reports revealing more details about the partisan origins of the Russian “collusion” narrative and subsequent investigation.

“‘New evidence that the Obama era team of the FBI, DOJ & CIA were working together to Spy on (and take out) President Trump, all the way back in 2015.’ A transcript of Peter Strzok’s testimony is devastating. Hopefully the Mueller Report will be covering this,” Trump tweeted Friday.

“So, if there was knowingly & acknowledged to be ‘zero’ crime when the Special Counsel was appointed, and if the appointment was made based on the Fake Dossier (paid for by Crooked Hillary) and now disgraced Andrew McCabe (he & all stated no crime), then the Special Counsel should never have been appointed and there should be no Mueller Report,” he said in follow-up tweets. “This was an illegal & conflicted investigation in search of a crime. Russian Collusion was nothing more than an excuse by the Democrats for losing an Election that they thought they were going to win…..THIS SHOULD NEVER HAPPEN TO A PRESIDENT AGAIN!”

“New evidence that the Obama era team of the FBI, DOJ & CIA were working together to Spy on (and take out) President Trump, all the way back in 2015.” A transcript of Peter Strzok’s testimony is devastating. Hopefully the Mueller Report will be covering this. @OANN @foxandfriends — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 15, 2019

So, if there was knowingly & acknowledged to be “zero” crime when the Special Counsel was appointed, and if the appointment was made based on the Fake Dossier (paid for by Crooked Hillary) and now disgraced Andrew McCabe (he & all stated no crime), then the Special Counsel……. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 15, 2019

….should never have been appointed and there should be no Mueller Report. This was an illegal & conflicted investigation in search of a crime. Russian Collusion was nothing more than an excuse by the Democrats for losing an Election that they thought they were going to win….. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 15, 2019

…..THIS SHOULD NEVER HAPPEN TO A PRESIDENT AGAIN! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 15, 2019

Related: Trump Vs. Coulter Gets Pretty Funny