On April 30, social distancing guidelines are set to expire in Dallas County, the state of Texas and at the federal level.

As that day nears, politicians and health officials are presenting graphs, each with a single ominous peak in COVID-19 caseloads, followed by a steep decline. Once the downward slope hits zero cases, Americans can — it might seem — start returning to life as it was.

But the concept of just one wave of infection is almost certainly wrong. If restrictions are lifted too early, there could be a resurgence.

The hard truth, according to public health experts, is that the virus will likely be with us for a long time.

How long depends on many unknowns: How well stay-at-home orders reduce disease spread. Whether or not the virus disappears for the summer and returns. How well public health officials can find, track and contain cases. When researchers can develop new treatments or a vaccine. How government officials balance the importance of keeping infections low through social distancing with the need to revive the economy.

Some forecasts show the current wave of cases peaking in late April or early May. Another forecast suggests a prolonged wave cresting this summer or later. One strategy recommends turning social distancing measures on and off, an approach that could continue until at least the beginning of next year.

The forecasts present a wide range of scenarios because they serve different purposes and make different assumptions. None is meant to be a perfect roadmap.

A sign reminds people to practice social distancing in the security checkpoint line at DFW International Airport on Wednesday, April 8, 2020. (Vernon Bryant / Staff Photographer)

The key, say experts, is to flatten the first wave while preparing for the next. To do so, local and state officials are consulting at least a half-dozen COVID-19 disease forecasts and creating their own. They are also watching transmission rates, beefing up testing and boosting their ability to trace the contacts of patients who test positive.

By Saturday, at least 12,500 Texans had tested positive for the virus, 1,500 were hospitalized around the state, and 254 had died, according to Texas health officials.

Texas Gov. Greg Abbott told The Dallas Morning News last week it was too soon to forecast when social distancing could be relaxed. “Those recommendations are driven by the data, so until we have the data in, there’s no way to say for sure,” he said in a statement. Later, he said at a news conference that he would issue an executive order this week addressing reopening Texas businesses.

Managing the first wave

Current indications are that the social distancing is paying off, said Dr. Philip Huang, director of the Dallas County Health and Human Services department. Hospital admissions are still rising, he said, but the pace has slowed.

“Everyone’s sacrifice is working,” Huang said. “But people cannot let up.”

Soon after the first cases appeared in Dallas County, weekly jumps in hospitalizations for COVID-19 started to climb quickly. In the second week in March, patients started arriving at hospitals. Fourteen were admitted that week, according to county health statistics. By the end of the third week of March, 58 new patients had been admitted — a quadrupling of cases.

Then Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins’ stay-at-home order went into effect. During the fourth week of March, at least 172 patients were admitted to hospitals. The exact numbers are still being tallied, but that amounted to at least triple the amount from the week before.

If cases had tripled again, as can happen in an unchecked epidemic, more than 500 new patients would have needed hospitalization the following week. But the latest figures indicate just 150 patients were hospitalized.

“This thing was starting to look like New York,” said Dr. Robert Haley, an epidemiologist at UT Southwestern Medical Center, speaking on behalf of the Dallas County Medical Society. “It looks like we caught it in the nick of time.”

Across Texas, cases are also rising more slowly thanks to social distancing, said Dr. John Hellerstedt, commissioner of the Department of State Health Services.

Hospitals are seeing similar trends. Dr. Miguel Benet, Medical City Healthcare’s chief medical officer, said transmission rates of COVID-19 have fallen among North Texans since late March, based on positive test results.

Anticipating a peak

Dallas County health officials have consulted several forecasts, including one generated by Medical City Healthcare. That forecast combines national and international research approaches — and adds data from hospitals across North Texas and the U.S.

The forecast projects that the current wave of cases in North Texas will peak in late April or early May, based on present conditions.

Hospitals should be able to accommodate COVID-19 patients. “I’m growing more confident of our ability to meet that peak demand as tactics from social distancing continue to have an impact,” said Benet.

Area hospitals have plans in place to boost ICU and ventilator capacity if needed.

Another widely cited forecast, from researchers at the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, or IHME, at the University of Washington, is based on the number of deaths in Texas so far.

As of Saturday, it projected a late April peak for Texas as a whole, assuming social distancing orders stay in effect through May. Like the Medical City forecast, the University of Washington forecast projects that cases are unlikely to overwhelm hospitals and ICUs.

Scenarios from scientists at the University of Texas at Austin, however, show D-FW cases peaking in or after mid-June — depending on how successfully Texans reduce their social contacts. The IHME model assumes that social distancing measures will be fully effective, says UT professor Lauren Ancel Meyers. The model she and her colleagues created assumes continued transmission of the virus during social distancing.

Dr. John Carlo, a former medical director of Dallas County’s health department who now runs a local network of HIV clinics, says the very nature of disease forecasts is that none is perfect.

It makes sense to look at several, just like weather experts watch multiple paths a hurricane might take.

Abbott and his top health officials held off last week on predicting when a peak would arrive. In his written responses to The News, Abbott referred to projections as early as mid-April to early May, or a prolonged impact that could last through the summer.

At the federal level, President Donald Trump has been eager for the economy to reopen and start resuming business as usual. His administration has stressed that the first two weeks of April would be incredibly tough for the country.

On March 31, Trump and Vice President Mike Pence asked the country for 30 more days of social distancing as they presented a graph of deaths peaking in the middle of April and trailing off to zero by July.

At Friday’s White House press briefing Trump said he was eyeing a date when he would recommend lifting restrictions. “But we’re not doing anything until we know that this country is going to be healthy,” he said. “We don’t want to go back and start doing it over again.”

He also announced he is forming a task force to recommend how to reopen businesses. The News asked the White House Coronavirus Task Force about its plans for addressing the spread of the virus after this round of social distancing — but didn’t receive a response.

After the decline

The idea of a single peak — and one that comes soon — is tantalizing. But experts say it’s not that simple.

Read the details about the curve the White House showed, and you’ll see the scientists plainly refer to it as the first wave of the epidemic. That’s because most of the population will have avoided the virus and won’t have any immunity to it.

At the bottom of the first peak — if and when it occurs — the virus will almost certainly still be circulating and causing new infections.

“If you lift social distancing on the first of May, [the curve] could just come swinging right back up,” said Carl Bergstrom, a biologist at the University of Washington.

While there’s a chance the virus goes dormant in the Northern Hemisphere this summer, it could still come back in the fall.

“There is going to be a second wave, and we have to be prepared for that,” said Esteban Moro of Madrid’s Universidad Carlos III and a visiting professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He has modeled the spread of COVID-19 in Boston and New York City and plans to expand his modeling to Texas and the rest of the U.S.

During the first wave, states must gear up to mitigate a second wave. “We have to do what we couldn’t do the first time: testing more patients, using quarantine and tracing people that are sick or who have symptoms,” he said.

New innovations might also help fight the virus, such as monitoring social connections with cellphones. Pings from mobile devices can show how individuals move about their communities and give some indication of how closely people are following social distancing guidelines.

“We can see how often people go to the grocery store, how many people they can find in the store and the probability that they will get infected,” said Moro.

He envisions a gradual lifting of restrictions, with those who can continue to telecommute remaining home until, possibly, the end of the year.

Other experts have proposed an intermittent social distancing strategy that could last into 2022. In a scenario offered by Marc Lipsitch of Harvard University’s T.H. Chan School of Public Health, social distancing could be turned on and off for weeks at a time, depending on whether a region was nearing its ICU capacity.

As more people gain immunity to COVID-19, periods of social distancing could grow shorter and less frequent.

The social distancing measures could end sooner if there’s a reduction in COVID-19 spread in the summer, an increase in ICU beds across the U.S., or new treatments for the disease.

Officials look ahead

As the epidemic progresses, pressure is mounting on elected officials. They will have to perform a balancing act that manages infection rates, hospital capacity and the health of the economy.

Jenkins says he anticipates extending his stay-at-home order. In a statement released to The News, he said he foresees “a gradual relaxing of the Safer at Home orders, consistent with the best scientific advice from our hospitals.”

Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins displays an improvised cloth face mask made with a bandana and hair ties as he addresses members of the media regarding the new coronavirus pandemic on Wednesday, April 8, 2020, at the Dallas County Emergency Operations Center in Dallas. (Ryan Michalesko / Staff Photographer)

That approach, he said, “will hopefully get our economy moving again while guarding against a crippling second wave of COVID-19.”

The county’s health department has doubled its contact tracing staff through temporary hires and has recruited 150 volunteers with medical experience to further boost its tracking and tracing capabilities. But the virus is difficult to halt, Jenkins said. Because so many patients show mild symptoms and some show none, the disease can spread quickly and quietly.

“Challenges will remain, in that you can’t isolate what you cannot identify, and you can’t identify/test someone who doesn’t think they feel sick,” he said.

Huang, the county health department director, said testing has improved, but is still too slow. Some commercial lab tests don’t come back for a week, and by then it’s too hard to track contacts. “That’s not acceptable,” he said. “That has to be corrected.”

So far, Abbott’s decisions for Texas have closely tracked Trump’s recommendations for the nation. Abbott indicated last week he would take his cues on when to begin recharging the business sector from standards set by Trump, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and data in Texas.

Hellerstedt, the state health official, said last week that the state doesn’t want to act prematurely and have a resurgence in cases.

Abbott said lifting social distancing would likely occur gradually and could vary by region. He said his administration “will be watching what happens in other countries and other states as they relax their social distancing measures” and “apply the most effective strategies in Texas.”

He did not respond to follow-up questions asking to detail a plan for amassing enough testing and contact tracing to contain the spread of the disease. The White House has not said when and how it will lift its social distancing guidelines.