Arlington ISD and the Rangers announced Friday that they have finalized a four-year agreement for AISD teams to play football games at Globe Life Park in Arlington, starting with a minimum of 14 regular-season games next season.

Arlington ISD athletic director Eric White said that if AISD teams earn the chance to host playoff games, those could be played at Globe Life Park. Soccer games and other AISD events could be held at the venue as well.

All six AISD high schools will host at least one football game at Globe Life Park, which was converted to a multi-purpose facility with a synthetic grass surface after the 2019 baseball season.

“That’s going to be a great venue,” White said. “As far as a football venue, it’s new, and we want all of our kids to have the opportunity to play there. It’s kind of an iconic venue.”

Globe Life Park is the previous home of the Rangers, who are scheduled to start play at the new Globe Life Field this season. The start of the Major League Baseball season has been delayed because of the coronavirus pandemic.

The XFL’s Dallas Renegades played their home games at Globe Life Park this season until the professional football league ended its season after five games because of the COVID-19 outbreak. The XFL suspended league operations and laid off its employees last week.

Arlington ISD football teams will play games at Globe Life Park in 2020. (Photo courtesy of Arlington ISD)

Globe Life Park will become the home stadium for Arlington and Arlington Martin, replacing UT-Arlington’s Maverick Stadium. AISD will not play games at UTA next season.

“This is an outstanding opportunity for our district at Globe Life Park,” AISD superintendent Marcelo Cavazos said in a news release. “This will provide a unique and lasting experience not only for our football players, but also for our students, cheer teams, bands, families and everyone coming to the park. We have always had an outstanding relationship with the Texas Rangers, and this just adds another layer to that.”

AISD will continue to hold games at Cravens Field and Wilemon Field. It will cost AISD $15,000 per event to hold games at Globe Life Park.

AISD will be building a new stadium on Martin’s campus, and Cravens and Wilemon will undergo renovations down the road. Globe Life Park will give AISD a third stadium for its schools to share until all of that is complete.

If next season is able to start on time and isn’t delayed because of the COVID-19 outbreak, Arlington Lamar will play the first game at Globe Life Park, hosting Euless Trinity at 7 p.m. Thursday, Aug. 27. There will be games there the next two days, with Arlington Martin hosting six-time state champion Austin Lake Travis at 7:30 p.m. Aug. 28, and Arlington Seguin hosting Carter at 7 p.m. Aug. 29.

“The Rangers want to thank the Arlington Independent School District for helping make Globe Life Park in Arlington a destination for high school football,” Sean Decker, Rangers executive vice president, sports & entertainment, said in the news release. “We are certainly hoping to have the honor of hosting these high school games this fall.

“However, the safety and health of everyone in Arlington is the main consideration, and we’ll await further guidance and information from the city.”

In Week 2, Arlington Bowie is scheduled to play DeSoto at 7 p.m. Sept. 3 at Globe Life Park, and Arlington will play Cedar Hill there at 7 p.m. Sept. 4. Arlington Sam Houston will play its first game at Globe Life Park on Sept. 17, hosting Keller Central at 7 p.m.

Martin and Arlington High are scheduled to host five games each, with Bowie, Lamar, Sam Houston and Seguin hosting one game apiece. Other notable games at Globe Life Park, according to AISD’s tentative schedule, include Martin vs. Southlake Carroll (7 p.m. Sept. 18), Martin vs. Arlington (7 p.m. Sept. 25), Martin vs. Lamar (7 p.m. Oct. 9) and Arlington vs. Bowie (7 p.m. Nov. 6).

AISD is scheduled to host its annual Dean Corey Band Event at Globe Life Park in early October.

+++

Subscribe now and get 1 month free with the code: GREGR

Sign up for our FREE HS newsletter

+++

Find more high school sports stories from The Dallas Morning News here.