(CNN) The Trump Organization has accused a law firm of removing references about its long-term relationship with the company from its website as the organization alleges a conflict of interest over a lawyer from the firm working for a House committee that's investigating the President's company.

In a new statement Monday, the Trump Organization said that until Friday, New York law firm Kramer Levin had boasted on its website of its 25-year relationship with the real estate firm, saying it advised on "innumerable real estate deals, including Trump Tower, 40 Wall Street, Trump Palace, Trump International in New York and Chicago, the GM building, the Plaza Hotel and numerous other matters." The Trump Organization said the description had been scrubbed from Kramer Levin real estate partner Jay Neveloff's biography.

A spokeswoman for Kramer Levin confirmed the description had been removed. "It is common practice to list prior representative experience in lawyer biographies on the website. The reference in Jay Neveloff's bio was removed on Friday to avoid confusion," said Jennifer Manton of Kramer Levin. She added that no lawyer at the firm is currently working on any Trump-affiliated matter.

On Tuesday, Rep. Doug Collins, a Georgia Republican who's the ranking member of the House Judiciary Committee, wrote a letter addressed to Paul Pearlman, Kramer Levin's managing partner, echoing the concerns raised by the Trump Organization about an alleged conflict of interest and questioning changes to the firm's website. The letter cited the same example included in the Trump Organization's statement.

"I hope your firm is not intentionally trying to downplay its longstanding ties to The Trump Organization -- and actively changing its website in real-time -- simply because one of your firm's partners, Mr. (Barry) Berke, is now in a position to use the awesome powers of the United States Congress to investigate one of your firm's leading clients," Collins' letter reads.

Read More