Cindy Goleman peered through a window of the one-story nursing facility in Mansfield. The glare from the west-facing windows made it hard to see inside. But there was her mother, sitting in a wheelchair, her face crisscrossed by light and shadow.

“Hi Mom!” she said, her forehead nearly touching the window pane at the rehabilitation facility where Peggy White, her 86-year-old mom, has spent the last two months since her stroke.

“How’s your arm today? Can you lift it up?”

It’s 5 p.m. on a recent weekday, and after leaving her office job at a medical center in Arlington, she made the 30-minute drive down Highway 360, like she does three or four times a week.

Goleman, 59, of Arlington, can’t go inside anymore to visit her mom. Not since the coronavirus pandemic caused hospitals, nursing homes and rehabilitation centers to close their doors to visitors here and all around the country.

She understands the reason for social distancing. So coming to the window helps her to keep up with her mother’s mood and progress. “But it’s not like being there in person,” she said.

Cindy Goleman visited her mother, Peggy White, from outside the window last week at The Pavilion at Creekwood, a healthcare and rehabilitation center in Mansfield. Peggy White had a stroke in late January. Cindy Goleman is one of many people who is currently unable to visit with parents or loved ones in nursing homes, hospitals or skilled healthcare facilities. Goleman speaks to her mother by phone as they visit through the window. (Vernon Bryant / Staff Photographer)

As they look at each other through the window, they talk to each other by phone.

“You're doing your exercises, Mom?”

White nods and lifts her right arm up nearly to eye-level.

“Wow. You're doing so good.”.

But it’s not really good. Neither of them is happy about the situation that leaves them inches away from each other, yet farther apart, it feels, than they’ve ever been in their lives.

Goleman would give anything to walk into her mom’s room, give her a hug and a kiss on the cheek, like she did for weeks after the stroke in late January.

Now, her options are limited. She can call her mom and listen to her voice. She can use FaceTime, though that usually requires the help of a nurse. Or, she can come to the window. There, she can peer inside her mom’s room and see how her physical therapy is progressing. And she can get a better sense of her mother’s mood.

Originally, her timetable for recovery was figured to be about 90 days, said her granddaughter, Meagan Myers of Arlington. Now, she said, “everything is on hold,” since the coronavirus restrictions went into place and there is no set timetable for her grandmother’s release. It could be at least another month.

The elderly and residents of long-term care nursing homes and assisted living facilities are particularly vulnerable to the new coronavirus. The first big outbreak of the coronavirus occurred at a nursing home in Washington state. And Dallas County is seeing a spike with about a dozen new cases reported in nursing homes this week and at least two deaths.

“That’s always been in the back of our minds,” said Myers. “We’re hoping and praying it doesn’t happen.”

Upbeat tone

"How’s your legs?”

Her mother lifts her left leg a few inches. She winces.

“OK,” says Cindy, trying to maintain an upbeat tone.

About 10 minutes go by, and Goleman is winding up her visit at the window. Instead of a hug and a kiss, she puts her hand on her mom’s window.

“So did they say when you can break out of this place?” Goleman said to her mom.

“ Not yet? OK.”

Strongest woman she knows

Her mother is one of the strongest people she knows, Goleman said.

Long before it was commonplace, she worked outside the home. She was a foreman at Vought Aircraft Industries in Grand Prairie, a subcontractor on the Air Force’s B-2 “stealth” bomber. She worked for more than 20 years for the manufacturer. At times, she needed a security clearance.

A Pennsylvanian by birth, White moved to Arlington in the 1950s after marrying her first husband, a Texan. When he died, she remarried a man she met at Vought. They’ve lived in the same house since Cindy was 6.

Back when she was in grade school, her mom worked the early shift and her stepdad got her and her older brother, Randy, out of bed and off to school. Then, her mom would pick up the kids after school and make dinner.

Eventually, Goleman would get dinner started “whenever they finally trusted me to not burn the house down,” she said laughing.

Through the years, meals remained a bonding experience.

She and her mom have never lived far apart. “She loves to cook,” Goleman said. “She would call me spur of the moment and say, ‘I’ve made some spaghetti. Come and get it.’ “

Goleman lives a few blocks away from her mother in the central Arlington house where she raised her only child, Meagan Myers, an obstetrics nurse. Myers has two children, a 3-year-old son and a daughter who’s only three months old. White was able to see her new baby granddaughter only once before the new rule went into effect banning visitors from the facility.

On a phone call, White talked about how much she misses her family, describing the situation she faces as “real strange.”

Except for physical therapy, she spends most of her time in her room, she said. Without visitors, there’s not much to do except watch TV. “I just watch whatever’s on,” she said.

She tries not to watch too much news right now. “It worries me,” she said.

She remembers how her daughter would stop by her room every day. She would spend a couple of hours with her and “get the laundry and make sure everything was all right.”

Sometimes, she’d bring her favorite treat: Chocolate ice cream from Braum’s.

She often sees other people walking down the sidewalk or cutting across the lawn. She figures they might be talking at the windows to their loved ones too, she said.

When she sees her daughter, it lifts her mood. “I’m very happy to see her,” she said.

Goleman said that until her stroke, her mother was always healthy and active. Besides the meals they shared, they often would go shopping together. Her mother was independent and still liked to drive in her 2014 Cadillac.

“She has always been a very, very strong person,” Goleman said. “And to see her like this…”

Cindy Goleman waves goodbye to her mother Peggy White from opposites sides of the window at The Pavilion at Creekwood, a healthcare and rehabilitation center in Mansfield. (Vernon Bryant / Staff Photographer)

Like her mother, Goleman is a strong woman. But she has moments of discouragement. “Some days I can handle it OK. And other times, I just break down because of the fact that I want her home.”

Goleman relies on a strong community of friends to help her through these difficult times. At Rush Creek Church in Arlington, which she attends, a group includes her mother in their prayers.

“And then all my Facebook friends are praying for her,” she said. And her coworkers. And her mother’s ex-coworkers and friends.

All those prayers and well wishes have helped her see a positive side to the situation, Goleman said. Her mother is working hard to get better.

“I think not being able to see us in person has made her fight hard to get back to us."