Television personalities are trying to get to the bottom of the coronavirus broadcasts — by not wearing any.

A video montage compiled by John Oliver’s “Last Week Tonight” contains dozens of clips of local news anchors across the country asking colleagues and guests on-air, “Are you wearing pants?”

“I do have pants on. You’re just going to have to take my word on that because I’m not standing up,” a bespectacled, shirt-and-tie-wearing TV guest quipped as part of the “Last Week Tonight” compilation, which aired Sunday on HBO.

The question of the day — or the week, or the month — rings true with viewers around the world working from home as fears over the coronavirus have closed offices, schools and other organizations.

And we have one definitive answer: Las Vegas Now anchor JC Fernandez, who made the “Last Week Tonight” montage, shared a clip with his own viewers and revealed what was going on down under.

“At home, I do wear pants — but here right now, I got no pants on,” Fernandez admits.

Oliver, 42, seems to be embracing work-from-home life, too. Upon the conclusion of his half-hour show filmed from his apartment, the seemingly suited host stood up from behind a table to reveal shorts covered in a pattern of Grovers from “Sesame Street.”

He’s not the only famous face who ditched trousers for TV. This week, actor John Krasinski’s new YouTube show, “Some Good News,” featured a surprise group video performance by the “Hamilton” cast for a 9-year-old girl who was supposed to see the Broadway show for her birthday. At the end of the 16-minute episode, 40-year-old Krasinski, clad in a white button-down shirt, tie and jacket, got up from behind a desk to reveal a tutu on his lower half.

Even Stephen Colbert is getting in on the no-pants trend. On the March 31 episode of “The Late Show with Stephen Colbert,” the 55-year-old discussed producing a show from home with fellow host Oliver, comparing notes on attire while taping.

Colbert: How is your personal hygiene? Are you wearing pants these days? Oliver: What kind of pants? What’s the bar for pants now? Colbert: Big-boy pants. Long pants. Oliver: I’m wearing sweatpants (Oliver stands up to show off a dark pair with zippered pockets.) Colbert: Oh, that’s not bad. Oliver: And they are stained with baby drool and peanut butter. So, could be worse. Colbert: Perfect, perfect. I’m wearing a suit, but I’m not wearing shoes. (Colbert lifts up a bare foot to the camera.)

The lighthearted exchange proves that careful camera placement means that a participant on Zoom, Skype or Google Hangouts can look professional up top, groomed and dressed in a suit or other work-appropriate attire, all while letting it all hang out where no one can see from the waist down.

The no-pants movement is even affecting shopping habits. Last week, Walmart reported an increase in sales of tops — not pants — during the coronavirus lockdown.