Good morning, Bay Area. It’s Friday, April 17, and we’ve been in lockdown mode for a month, even though it somehow feels shorter and longer than that. Here’s what you need to know to start your day.

One month later

A month into sheltering in place, it’s clear that early and aggressive social distancing efforts made a difference in the Bay Area, where the coronavirus outbreak appears to be ebbing and the health care system has so far not been overrun with seriously ill patents.

But the public health response that has won accolades from across the state and nation has struggled to protect the region’s most vulnerable residents, in particular people in nursing homes and who are homeless, say infectious disease and public health experts.

Erin Allday reports on the state of Bay Area’s coronavirus response, and how the pandemic’s hot spots are tied to deeply rooted, systemic challenges, like homelessness and health crises in long-term care facilities.

More:

• The state’s black residents are dying from the coronavirus at nearly twice the rate of white residents, according to initial figures released this week from the California Department of Public Health.

• Several Bay Area counties will require face masks starting next week, official says.

• MSC South: None of 93 homeless people who tested positive at San Francisco shelter showed serious coronavirus symptoms.

• Learning more about asymptomatic spread: At least 5,000 healthy volunteers in the East Bay will soon find out whether they have — or ever had — the coronavirus, as UC Berkeley public health researchers begin testing them in early May to learn how far the coronavirus has spread.

Mega-drought

California’s crushing five-year drought came to a welcome end after record rain three winters ago. Or did it?

While forests are greener, reservoirs are fuller and widespread water restrictions are gone, many believe the past few years, which saw pretty decent rainfall, were just a blip on a troubling, long-term skid into drier times.

A group of scientists now says that the American West, including California, has been in the midst of a prolonged drought since the beginning of the century — one on par with only four mega-droughts experienced over the past 1,200 years.

Kurtis Alexander reports on the implications for California if current dry times continue.

Transit for the essential

About 30,000 people still take BART on weekdays, although that’s a drop of more than 90% from the rail service’s daily haul of 400,000 riders in February. Many of the passengers who remain are front-line workers who wear delivery uniforms or scrubs. Without cars, some rely on transit to go shopping or get to doctor’s appointments.

Rachel Swan reports on how Bay Area transit agencies are scrambling to redesign their systems on a dime, as they grapple with financial losses climbing into the hundreds of millions of dollars.

A second wave of help

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s negotiating prowess is being tested as she represents Democrats in the nation’s largely closed capital.

Republicans have been pressuring Democrats to act swiftly to replenish a loan program created to help small businesses through the nation’s stay-at-home orders. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin tried to add $250 billion to the program in the Senate last week, hoping to jam Democrats into moving it forward without adding spending on any other programs.

But Pelosi and Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer of New York say any bill must include money for hospitals, state and local governments and set-asides for businesses owned by women and people of color. Washington correspondent Tal Kopan reports on the negotiations.

Legacy businesses and crowdfunding: The current proliferation of GoFundMe campaigns for small businesses — such as Specs’ in San Francisco’s North Beach — says something about the way that these business owners perceive the availability of government assistance, Esther Mobley writes.

Changed campaign: In California and across the country, the coronavirus is making for explosive politics.

Full coronavirus coverage

‘Stratospherically high’: 5.2 million new unemployment claims across the nation this week.

Webster Garrison: A’s coach stricken by COVID-19 is off ventilator and breathing on his own.

San Diego resident: Aircraft carrier sailor who died of coronavirus identified as Charles Robert Thacker Jr. Meanwhile: Dozens of sailors from aircraft carrier Roosevelt test newly positive for coronavirus, Navy says.

Adjusted schedule: San Francisco teachers will be paid for full-time work, but required to work only four hours a day during the coronavirus closures, according to a labor agreement approved this week. The part-time work schedule was also adopted by other districts across the state, including Los Angeles, San Diego and Oakland.

‘He gave and gave and never stopped’: Hayward nursing home victim dedicated himself to students, community. Also: Pedro Zuniga, a longtime employee who worked at the Safeway distribution center in Tracy, died this week of COVID-19, marking the second death of a grocery store worker in Northern California during the pandemic.

Pro athletes giving back: Steph and Ayesha Curry’s foundation is now providing 300,000 meals a week to Oakland residents in need, and Colin Kaepernick starts coronavirus relief fund for minority communities.

Joining Wolfgang Puck and heads of McDonald’s, Coca-Cola: French Laundry chef Thomas Keller joins Trump’s economic revival group.

Around the Bay

• More available than toilet paper? Impossible Burger comes to Bay Area grocery stores Friday.

• ‘I’m a regular bike rider and a regular Muni rider’: S.F. mayor picks Jane Natoli as first trans woman to serve on the Municipal Transportation Agency board.

• Price rise: Bay Area home prices rose substantially in March despite a drop in sales compared with last March.

• Shutdown within past month: Mestiza and Viognier close, plus other permanent restaurant closures since the coronavirus shelter in place.

In case you missed it

As the coronavirus throws more challenges at San Francisco nearly every day, City Hall’s normally unwieldy and complex decision-making process has been largely centralized into two people: the mayor and county Health Officer Tomás Aragón. Armed with the power of an emergency order, they have been able to enact policies — like ordering the entire city to shelter in place — on their own.

The Board of Supervisors retains its regular powers to enact legislation. But, amid a rapidly changing pandemic, there’s a major flaw in those powers: Even an expedited emergency ordinance takes more than a week to enact.

Recognizing the importance of City Hall unity before a jittery public, the supervisors involved said they were careful early in the crisis not to criticize the mayor’s plans. Instead, they negotiated privately — but that’s beginning to shift as the crisis deepens, Trisha Thadani reports.

Bay Briefing is written by Taylor Kate Brown and sent to readers’ email inboxes on weekday mornings. Sign up for the newsletter here, and contact Brown at taylor.brown@sfchronicle.com.