The coronavirus has made people cook at home more than ever before — a fitting time for the Impossible Burger to debut at Bay Area grocery stores.

Redwood City food-tech company Impossible Foods will roll out its incredibly beef-like soy burgers to all Northern California Safeway stores on Friday. A 12-ounce package of Impossible Burger bulk meat, which customers can form into patties at home, will cost $8.99-$9.99, depending on the store. It might take a few weeks for every store to have the product in stock.

“The demand for food is not going to go away no matter how disruptive the economy is. For us, that means if food consumption patterns change, we need to take advantage of our agility … to go where our food consumers are going,” said Impossible Foods CEO Pat Brown.

Impossible Foods first entered grocery stores in Los Angeles last fall, and has slowly added outlets on the East Coast. This next wave will see Impossible Burger in all stores owned by Albertsons, Safeway’s parent company, in California, Nevada and the Chicago area, bringing the total to over 1,000 stores — a 500% increase.

Before their Los Angeles debut, the vegan burgers were available only in restaurants, starting at top chef-driven spots in 2016 then moving to fast food chains like Burger King.

Plant-based burger rival Beyond Meat in Southern California has had its Beyond Burger in grocery stores for several years, where they usually retail for $5.99 for two 4-ounce patties.

The coronavirus’ disruption of the restaurant industry accelerated Impossible Foods’ retail expansion, though Impossible Foods President Dennis Woodside said 2020 was always the year the company planned to ramp up its grocery store footprint.

Despite the fact that some restaurant clients have closed, Impossible Foods is increasing production. Woodside, who joined the company in March 2019 after serving in senior roles at Google and Dropbox, said restaurants with drive-throughs are maintaining strong sales and others, like Prairie in San Francisco, have been selling Impossible Burger as a raw product in an adapted general store setup.

Impossible Foods added a second production line at its Oakland factory specifically for retail, with plans to eventually bring multiple Impossible Foods products to grocery stores. Impossible Foods announced a new pork-like product earlier this year.

While multiple huge meat-processing plants have closed because workers were sickened by the coronavirus, Woodside said customers shouldn’t be concerned about similar problems arising at Impossible Food’s factory because production is more automated. Brown, whose mission is to eliminate the meat industry, pointed to how some scientists believe the coronavirus spread to humans because of wild animal butchery at wet markets in China.

“I think it really has been a wake-up call to a lot of people,” Brown said. “There certainly will be more awareness of the huge public health risks we’re taking by continuing to produce food this way and the huge advantages of changing to a plant-based system.”

Janelle Bitker is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: janelle.bitker@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @janellebitker