Judicial Watch is on a roll.

Conservative watchdog group Judicial Watch filed a lawsuit against the DOJ on Tuesday for communications between former FBI lawyer James Baker and Michael Sussmamm, a Perkins Coie law partner and former DOJ attorney.

Michael Sussmann represented the DNC and Hillary Clinton’s campaign while Perkins Coie covertly paid for the fake Russia dossier that the FBI and DOJ used to obtain FISA warrants on Trump campaign advisor Carter Page to spy on Trump.

The lawsuit was filed after the FBI failed to respond to a FOIA request dated October 5, 2018 (Judicial Watch v. U.S. Department of Justice (No. 1:19-cv-00573)).

TRENDING: THE END OF AN ERA: Drudge Goes Full Leftie - Loses President Trump-- Go to Pro-Trump News Instead

Judicial Watch is seeking:

Any and all records of communication between former FBI General Counsel James Baker and former Department of Justice attorney and current Perkins Coie Partner Michael Sussman. Any and all records created in preparation for, during, and/or pursuant to any meeting between Mr. Baker and Mr. Sussman. Any and all calendars, agendas, or similar records, either in paper or electronic format, documenting the schedule and activities of Mr. Baker.

The time frame for Judicial Watch’s request is between January 1, 2016 and December 31, 2016.

Hillary Clinton and the DNC funneled money through Perkins Coie to pay oppo research firm Fusion GPS for the fake Russia dossier that was compiled by former British spy Christopher Steele.

Former FBI lawyer James Baker told Republican lawmakers in two October 2018 interviews that he met with Michael Sussmann in September of 2016, just weeks before the first FISA warrant on Carter Page was issued.

James Baker told lawmakers in October that Michael Sussmann gave him “documents and a thumb drive related to Russian interference in the election, hacking and possible Trump connections.”

Congressman Mark Meadows grilled James Baker during the October interview and asked him, ‘Is it normal for the FBI to meet with a presidential candidate’s lawyer?’

“This lawsuit aims to fully expose the scandalous collusion between the Obama FBI and the Clinton-DNC political operation to target Hillary Clinton’s political opponent, Donald J. Trump.” said Judicial Watch President Tom Fitton. “The corrupted FBI owes Americans total transparency on this scandal.”

.@JudicialWatch lawsuit aims to fully expose scandalous collusion between Obama FBI and Clinton-DNC political operation to target Hillary Clinton’s political opponent, @RealDonaldTrump. The corrupted FBI owes Americans total transparency on this scandal. https://t.co/0dM9xYE0Jt — Tom Fitton (@TomFitton) April 16, 2019

You can support Tom Fitton and Judicial Watch by clicking here.