It’s a Match.com cautionary tale.

A respected neuroscientist who was falsely accused of assault and harassment by a former girlfriend and then dragged through a four-year civil proceeding ended up being awarded a cash judgment from his tormentor, The Post has learned.

“I just want to make sure this doesn’t happen to anyone else,” said Frank Barone, 67, who estimates he’s still about $85,000 in the hole from the relationship.

“People need to be careful. Don’t move in with somebody you don’t know.”

The SUNY Downstate academic met his litigious lover, Gail Strum, 65, on the dating web site in 2012 and she moved into his Flatbush apartment near the campus soon after.

“It was a whirlwind romance,” he recalled.

But Strum didn’t approve of the neighborhood and insisted that he empty his pockets for a luxury $5,800-a-month penthouse apartment on Gold Street in downtown Brooklyn, he said.

“I cared about her at the time,” he said. “I was trying to take care of her.”

Six months later, after spending thousands on her dental work, jewelry and rent, Strum abruptly accused him of beating her during a spat in their apartment, according to Barone and court papers.

Suddenly, the mild-mannered professor found himself languishing in a jail cell. The divorced father of two was arrested and spent a night behind bars, insisting from the outset that Strum attacked him in an unhinged frenzy when he suggested ending their increasingly pricey union.

“She pulled the blankets from me and punched me in the face,” he said. “I had my breathing machine on, she punched it and it flew off. Then, she beat me on the back with a shoe.”

Barone was forced to stay in a Motel 6 because of a restraining order while paying rent for the penthouse Strum was allowed to luxuriate in until prosecutors dismissed the case.

As a parting blow, Strum allegedly emptied Barone’s checking account and when she moved out of the apartment also swiped thousands of dollars worth of his property, according to Barone and court papers.

Then, adding insult to injury, Strum filed a $6.5 million Manhattan civil suit against him, claiming he abused her and smoked marijuana excessively. She also filed a slew of claims against him in family court, records show.

Unwilling to fold without retribution, the scientist filed a counterclaim. The family court and civil cases against him were ultimately tossed by judges.

The flurry of court activity and legal wrangling spanned four years and “the relationship cost me in excess of $250,000,” Barone said.

But Barone eventually won a Pyrrhic victory. Justice Martin Schoenfeld awarded him $165,000 on his counterclaim for false arrest, attorneys’ fees, stolen items and defamation.

“This case is primarily one of malicious prosecution and tortious interference and abuse of process,” the judge wrote in the damning decision issued last year.

“Ms. Strum was relentless in her actions against Mr. Barone,” ruled Schoenfeld. “[She] also sent letters to his employer, so she had defamed him and caused him to even go for psychoanalysis.”

The judge described her as “not apparently a very stable person.”

Barone is speaking out after he allegedly got a phone call from the concerned daughter of Strum’s latest paramour who saw a story about her dastardly exploits in The Post. The man eventually booted Strum from his house.

“She almost did this to someone else,” Barone said incredulously.

Strum didn’t return requests comment.