COVID-19 testing is moving into airports Emirates, Hong Kong, Tokyo Narita start checking passengers for virus

Health worker at Dubai Airport takes a blood sample from an Emirates passenger. Health worker at Dubai Airport takes a blood sample from an Emirates passenger. Photo: Emirates Photo: Emirates Image 1 of / 8 Caption Close COVID-19 testing is moving into airports 1 / 8 Back to Gallery

International travelers may have encountered some very basic screening for COVID-19 symptoms at certain airports recently, probably amounting to nothing more than a temperature check and some questioning. But a new wave of screening coming to airports this month goes way beyond that, using advanced techniques to test passengers on site for the presence of the coronavirus itself.

In Dubai, Emirates said this week it has become the first airline to start conducting on-site, pre-departure quick COVID-19 testing at Dubai International Airport. The airline, working with the Dubai Health Authority, takes passenger blood samples at the airport before departure and said it can obtain test results within 10 minutes. The first test of the system was conducted this week on passengers traveling on an Emirates flight to Tunisia.

“We are working on plans to scale up testing capabilities in the future and extend it to other flights. This will enable us to conduct on-site tests and provide immediate confirmation for Emirates passengers travelling to countries that require COVID-19 test certificates,” said Emirates chief operating officer Adel Al Redha. It was not clear if the Emirates is testing for the virus only, or for antibodies.

At Japan’s Tokyo Narita Airport, meanwhile, officials have introduced on-site COVID-19 testing for arriving passengers from widely infected countries like Italy and the U.S., who are required to undergo a virus check. However, the test can take anywhere from six hours to two days for the test results to come in, according to media reports. Arriving travelers who undergo the test aren’t allowed to use public transportation, so unless they arrange for someone to pick them up, they have to stay in the airport to await test results.

To help with this, Tokyo Narita has arranged some special accommodations for those unlucky travelers who must wait in its baggage claim area. Those accommodations consist of special temporary “beds” made of heavy-duty cardboard, along with a mattress and a quilt. The jury-rigged system probably works for now because the number of arriving international passengers is currently so small. (You can read more about one traveler's experience here.)

Don't miss a shred of important travel news! Sign up for our FREE bi-weekly email alerts.

Hong Kong last week started mandatory COVID-19 testing last week for all travelers arriving at its international airport. Passengers coming in from countries that are considered high-risk will be given tests that can produce results in about eight hours, and they’ll have to wait out that time at a temporary testing facility in an exhibition center near the airport. Those coming from lower-risk places will get a different test that may take days to produce results. They won’t have to stay at the airport, but they’ll have to wear a tracking wristband that officials can check on to make sure they self-isolate.

We haven’t seen any COVID-19 on-site testing at U.S. airports yet, but XpresSpa Group Inc., operator of passenger spas at 23 airports including San Francisco International (which are currently closed because they are considered non-essential services), recently created a new subsidiary called XpresTest Inc. for that very purpose.

The company said it is working with health care partners to develop COVID-19 screening and testing technology for deployment in U.S. airports. But those tests, initially at least, wouldn’t be for airline passengers.

“While nothing definitive has yet been finalized, XpresSpa is currently in discussions with three major airports, JFK International Airport, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport and Chicago O'Hare International Airport to pilot COVID-19 screening and testing for airline employees, contractors and workers, concessionaires and their employees, TSA agents, and U.S. Customs and Border Protection agents,” the company said.

Read all recent TravelSkills posts here

Chris McGinnis is SFGATE's senior travel correspondent. You can reach him via email or follow him on Twitter or Facebook. Don't miss a shred of important travel news by signing up for his FREE biweekly email updates!

SFGATE participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites.