Editor’s note: This story has been updated since it was first published.

Satou Sabally (SAH-Two SAH-Buh-Lee) left Oregon after her junior season to pursue a WNBA career.

And she didn’t have to wait long during the 2020 draft to learn where she’ll play.

The Wings selected the 6-4 Sabally, an All-American forward who grew up in Germany, with the No. 2 overall pick Friday night.

Shortly after Sabally’s announcement, the Wings took Princeton forward Bella Alarie at No. 5 and South Carolina point guard Tyasha Harris at No. 7. Dallas also added 6-3 center Luisa Geiselsöder out of Germany with the 21st overall pick in Round 2.

Oregon point guard Sabrina Ionescu went No. 1 overall to the New York Liberty, making Ionescu and Sabally the first NCAA teammates to be drafted with the top two picks since UConn had players go Nos. 1-3 in the 2016 WNBA draft.

Sabally had said in the lead up to the draft the uncertainty surrounding the coronavirus pandemic caused her to question her decision to leave college a season early.

The second thoughts disappeared Friday evening when Commissioner Cathy Engelbert announced Sabally’s pick on ESPN from her New Jersey home as part of the league’s all-virtual draft setup.

“It really just gives me a sense of relief,” Sabally said. “Right now, [I’m] just going to celebrate and lean back a little bit, but I feel like in three days or maybe a week, I’m going to be hungry to come up to Dallas and just train and play.”

That many predicted Oregon as a favorite to win the 2020 national championship before the NCAA canceled its basketball tournaments because of the coronavirus meant Sabally’s talent garnered national attention throughout her junior year.

Sabally was a consensus second-team All-American and the Cheryl Miller Award winner for the nation’s top small forward. She averaged 16.2 points and 6.9 rebounds while shooting 46.4% from the field in 29 games last season.

Experts had predicted the Wings would choose between Sabally or Baylor’s Lauren Cox, a forward from Flower Mound, at No. 2. Cox went No. 3 to the Indiana Fever and former Mansfield Timberview and Texas A&M guard Chennedy Carter went No. 4 to the Atlanta Dream.

Wings president and CEO Greg Bibb said Sabally has the potential to be a “generational talent” whom he predicted would’ve been the No. 1 overall pick if not for sharing a draft class with Ionescu. Her versatility to score and defend in the paint, while playing consistently on the perimeter, piqued Dallas’ interest.

Welcome @BallySatou. Dallas is a great spot to be!!! Let’s go!! — Dirk Nowitzki (@swish41) April 17, 2020

Sabally’s selection kicked off a busy start to the draft for the Wings, who also owned the No. 5 and No. 7 picks by way of trading All-Star Skylar Diggins to the Phoenix Mercury in mid-February.

Alarie, the reigning three-time Ivy League Player of the Year, averaged 17.5 points and 8.6 rebounds per game in 23 games as a senior. That Alarie hit her growth spurt late meant she often played point guard as a young player and developed standout ball-handling skills Bibb said the Wings coveted.

Harris, who averaged 12 points and 5.7 assists in 33 games for South Carolina as a senior, will offer depth at point guard. Plus, she’s already familiar with two Wings teammates: forward Kaela Davis and guard Allisha Gray, who helped lead South Carolina to the 2017 national championship when Harris was a freshman.

“I’ll get accustomed really well, Harris said. “and they can teach me the ropes.”

Bibb said Geiselsöder, 20, who’s played in the German national team system with Sabally, will likely continue to play internationally to develop, rather than suiting up for Dallas in 2020.

Dallas on Wednesday traded the No. 9 and No. 15 selections in this year’s draft — along with guard Tayler Hill — to the Liberty for first- and second-round picks next season.

That meant the Wings, who finished 10-24 in 2019, didn’t hold four first-round picks as originally planned.

But Bibb was pleased to capitalize on the Wings’ longtime 2020 draft focus with three players who will compete for prominent, immediate roles when the league’s indefinite coronavirus suspension ends.

“We’re really young, perhaps painfully young,” Bibb said. “But I think we have now aggregated a tremendous amount of young talent on this roster, and we have an opportunity to grow this team.”

I think it’s safe to say @Arike_O is hyped about the @DallasWings’ draft haul. pic.twitter.com/nOIfSWbuQk — Selby Lopez (@LopezSelby31) April 18, 2020

Find more high school sports stories from The Dallas Morning News here.