CLOSE

Prescott Valley will lose a historic marker in March.

After about 50 years in business, the Prescott Valley Motel at 8390 State Route 69 closed in 2018. The following year, Circle K announced it would build on the lot.

Now, the motel's neon sign that has glowed for decades must be removed. The gas station is slated to open March 17, and the sign has to go. It's not up to town code.

“Believe me, we wanted to keep it,” said Jerry Russell, a superintendent for Alexander Building Company in Scottsdale, which is building the Circle K. “It’s a landmark.”

Russell, who is in charge of the sign's removal, had his daughter post the sign for sale on Facebook Marketplace for $1 or best offer on Feb. 13. The buyer had to be able to take it down and haul it away.

MORE THINGS TO DO: For restaurant reviews, travel tips, concert picks and more, subscribe to azcentral.com.

'It had to be taken down'

The motel and Y-Not Lounge were demolished last fall. In recent years, the motel's online ratings ranged from “disgusting” to “the best,” but there's agreement on one thing: The neon sign will be missed.

Bids for the Prescott Valley Motel have gone above $1,000 as of Feb. 21. (Photo: Jerry Russell)

“It was an older building that had definitely seen better days, but the owners were lovely people and were extremely kind,” Mary Berger, a former employee, said. “It was sad when it closed. It was the most historic building in Prescott Valley, as far as I know.”

“The sign is pretty iconic,” she added.

The colorful sign with angles and curves reflected its Googie inspiration. Googie architecture and design, with its futuristic and Atomic Age influences, was popular from the mid-1940s to the mid-1960s.

“We are aware of the historical significance of the old Prescott Valley Motel sign," Circle K said in a statement to The Arizona Republic. "Our intention was originally to modify the sign in order to preserve it. Unfortunately, it later became clear that the sign did not meet the city code and could not be modified to comply, so it had to be taken down."

More: A piece of Phoenix history restored: Arby's neon sign will glow again

Efforts to save the sign

Prescott Valley Mayor Kell Palguta initially tried to preserve the sign. In September, he posted a poll on Facebook to suggest how Circle K might redesign and repurpose it.

“In an attempt to keep some history of the town incorporated with the future I have reached out to Circle K to establish a dialogue in reference this matter,” Palguta wrote in the post, which garnered 200 comments.

That effort stagnated when “the structural integrity of the sign was called into question,” said Larry Tarkowski, Prescott Valley’s town manager. “It took our interest away from it.”

It didn’t make sense to invest in refurbishing the sign because it was “rusted out” and “structurally not sound,” he said.

It is not financially feasible for Circle K to rehabilitate the motel sign, Russell said, because of its condition and that it doesn't comply with current codes.

"We are committed to ... complying (with) local regulations in each of our markets," Circle K said in its statement.

Finding the highest bidder

Fans of the sign called upon preservation groups to save it, but logistical issues proved to be a deterrent.

“The Society was asked if we wanted this sign; it would not even begin to fit in the door of the Civic building!” the Prescott Valley Historical Society posted on Facebook in September.

The Arizona Preservation Foundation, a nonprofit advocacy organization, has also looked into the possibility of saving the motel sign. They reached out to the Prescott Valley Historical Society and the Mesa Preservation Foundation to find parties interested in taking in the piece, board president Jim McPherson said.

"The goal is to keep a historic/cultural resource in the community in which it's originally located," McPherson said.

Tucson-based Cook & Company Signmakers gave McPherson an estimate to remove the sign that exceeds $5,000. The cost took into account the distance the workers would have to travel to get the job done.

What's next for the sign?

The Prescott Valley Motel sign's listing on Facebook Marketplace is closed. The most recent price indicated on the listing is $1,500, but Russell would not disclose the final price. He said he has a winning bidder but no concrete plans for the sign removal.

The sign needs to be gone by March 10, Russell said.

"Or else I'll have to just tear it down," he said.

Reach the reporter at kimi.robinson@gannett.com or at 602-444-4968. Follow her on Twitter @kimirobin.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/travel/arizona/2020/03/02/prescott-valley-motel-vintage-neon-sign-will-be-torn-down/4821553002/