In a show of force, more than 20 House lawmakers chairing committees condemned President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE’s recent treatment of federal watchdogs.

Rep. Carolyn Maloney Carolyn Bosher MaloneyHillicon Valley: House Dems push for B in state election funds | Amazon suspends over 6,000 sellers for price gouging | Google says 18M malicious coronavirus emails sent daily House Democrats push hard for mail-in voting funds NY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus MORE (D-N.Y.), chairwoman of the House Oversight and Reform Committee, led 22 other top Democrats in asking Justice Department Inspector General Michael Horowitz for input on legislation after two inspector general were removed and one was publicly berated by Trump.

Horowitz chairs the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency (CIGIE), a group that includes watchdogs across federal agencies.

ADVERTISEMENT

“Unlike any President in modern history, President Trump has engaged in offensive and unjustified attacks against Inspectors General, criticizing them for following the law, and retaliating against them for telling the truth,” the chairs wrote in a Friday letter to Horowitz.

Their letter points to several recent shakeups with inspectors general, including Trump's sudden decision to fire Intelligence Community Inspector General Michael Atkinson on Friday, his removal of the top inspector general who was recently assigned to oversee the $2.2 trillion coronavirus relief package, and the president's attacks against a watchdog at Health and Human Services (HHS).

Trump received fierce blowback from Democrats and Republicans alike over his decision to fire Atkinson, in what is widely believed to be retribution for his handling of the Ukraine whistleblower complaint that led to the House impeachment inquiry.

"There is no credible allegation that Mr. Atkinson failed to perform his duties properly, failed to take any required action, or took any action that might bring discredit on his office," the lawmakers wrote, noting that Trump did not give Congress the required 30-day notification of plans to remove an inspector general.

Atkinson deemed the complaint, which raised allegations that Trump was pressuring Ukraine to investigate a political foe, as both credible and urgent, a conclusion that triggered a process for the complaint to be disclosed to Congress. He has also said he believes he was fired for this decision.

ADVERTISEMENT

The Democrats said they now are considering legislation that would restrict the removals of IGs to a list of certain "good cause" conditions.

"We are seeking input directly from the Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency on legislative and other proposals to increase your independence and protect you from retaliation, including but not limited to allowing for the removal of top Inspector General officials only for good cause," the letter states.

Trump also abruptly removed and replaced acting Pentagon Inspector General Glenn Fine, who just a week before was selected by peers on the CIGIE to chair the Pandemic Response Accountability Committee, tasked with overseeing the $2 trillion coronavirus relief package.

The White House has not given a reason for the change.

The lawmakers also noted Trump's public berating of Christi Grimm, the HHS watchdog, after her office released a report that found “severe” shortages of coronavirus tests for hospitals and “widespread” shortfalls of protective equipment designed to protect health workers.

“Each one of these actions by the President would raise significant concerns by itself,” they wrote. “Together, they reflect a campaign of political retaliation and reward that is antithetical to good government, undermine the proper stewardship of taxpayer dollars, and degrade the federal government’s ability to function competently.”

The letter was signed by a list of powerful House Democrats including Intelligence Chairman Adam Schiff Adam Bennett SchiffPelosi to appear on 'Fox News Sunday' for first time since 2017 Krystal and Saagar debate former Clinton advisor on Biden's electability Schiff throws support behind Biden MORE (Calif.), Judiciary Chairman Jerrold Nadler Jerrold (Jerry) Lewis NadlerNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus House Judiciary Committee postpones hearing with Barr amid coronavirus outbreak House Democrats plead with key committee chairman to allow remote voting amid coronavirus pandemic MORE (N.Y.), Appropriations Chairwoman Nita Lowey Nita Sue LoweyThe Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Trump may exert unprecedented power on nominees Senior Democrat casts doubt on House returning next week Top House Democrats ask inspectors general group for proposals to protect watchdogs MORE (N.Y.) and Armed Services Chairman Adam Smith David (Adam) Adam SmithOvernight Defense: Pentagon chief open to reinstating fired captain | First service member with virus cleared | Republican proposes B fund to counter China Key Republican proposes B to counter China in Indo-Pacific Top Democrats push Trump administration on lapsed cost-sharing deal with South Korea MORE (Wash.).