What the world needs now is some good news, says John Krasinski.

On Sunday, Krasinski premiered “Some Good News” on YouTube, a show dedicated to sharing positive stories during the coronavirus pandemic.

And, to the delight of “The Office” fans, he invited former co-star Steve Carell to join for his first installment.

Last week, the “A Quiet Place” actor/writer/director asked Twitter to send him “stories that have made you feel good this week or the things that just made you smile!”

Dressed in a suit jacket and tie, Krasinski, 40, addressed the camera with a hand-painted sign reading “SGN” in the background — crafted by his daughters Hazel, 6, and Violet, 3, with wife Emily Blunt, 37.

Introducing his new series, Krasinski told viewers he had “no idea” what he was doing.

“For years now, I’ve been wondering, why is there not a news show dedicated entirely to good news? Well, desperately seeking my fix somewhere else, I reached out to all of you this week, asking — nay, begging — for some good news,” he began. “And boy, did you deliver. After reading those replies and the incredibly heartwarming stories that came with them, I thought, ‘All right. Enough is enough, world. Why not us? Why not now?’ So, ladies and gentlemen, this is your fault, and this is ‘SGN.’ I’m John Krasinski, and if it isn’t clear yet, I have absolutely no idea what I’m doing.”

Anchor Krasinski modeled the show after a stereotypical nightly news broadcast: Seated at a desk, he shuffled papers, turning his head from one camera angle to the next as he read the headlines.

“Without question, we are all going through an incredibly trying time, but through all the anxiety, all the confusion, all the isolation and all the ‘Tiger King’ [Netflix’s much-discussed new documentary series], somehow the human spirit found a way to break through and blow us all away.”

He also dedicated a portion of his first newscast to the show that made him famous, “The Office.” The American adaptation of Ricky Gervais’ British creation celebrates its 15th anniversary this year. As a treat for fans who have begged for a cast reunion, he invited Carell to share some memories of the nine-season series.

“I guarantee you that the bottom half of what you have on does not match the top,” joked Carell, insinuating that Krasinski may not be wearing suit trousers.

Krasinski also confessed that he hoped the cast would indeed get together post-coronavirus isolation, “as people, just to say hi.”

The newscast featured several stories inspired by fans’ tweets, including public praise for health care workers and stories of people helping people, providing cleaning supplies, performing chores and delivering meals to the sick or elderly.

He also invited 15-year-old Coco, a fan who had just finished her final round of chemotherapy, to share her good news. Following her final treatment, she returned home to find her street filled with cheering neighbors, all there to encourage her recovery.

“You are my newest and biggest hero,” Krasinski told her.

Signing off, Krasinski told watchers, “I’m John Krasinski, and this is ‘SGN,’ asking you to remember, no matter how tough life can get, there’s always good in the world and we will see you next time. Good night.”

He then stood up to reveal that Carell had correctly guessed that his playfully printed bottoms did not match his suited top before walking off-camera.

“We might just do this again,” the end credits concluded.