J.C. Penney Co. received an offer for about $300 million in new financing just before it started the clock on a potential bankruptcy filing, according to people with knowledge of the matter.

The retailer’s decision to skip a debt payment on April 15 and start a 30-day countdown to default took some of its investors by surprise because the chain had just paid April rent on its stores, the people said. What’s more, it had cash to make the bond payment, and creditors are interested in providing J.C. Penney with financing out of bankruptcy, they said.

The offer came from creditors who are in a group of first-lien and second-lien lenders that is organized with advisers at Stroock & Stroock & Lavan LLP and Evercore Inc., the people said. The loan would be secured by real estate that J.C. Penney hasn’t already pledged to other debt, said the people. They asked not to be identified discussing confidential matters.

Separately, first-lien creditors are exploring alternatives that could see them offer financing backed by the unencumbered real estate, according to a person with knowledge of the matter. That creditor group, which includes KKR & Co. and Ares Management Corp., is being advised by White & Case LLP and Houlihan Lokey Inc.

A representative for the Plano-based company declined to comment. Representatives for Evercore, KKR, Ares, White & Case and Houlihan Lokey declined to comment, while representatives for Stroock couldn’t immediately comment.

J.C. Penney, led by chief executive Jill Soltau, has said it’s considering all options now that the retail shutdown caused by the coronavirus outbreak has upended her plans for a comeback year. Those alternatives could include filing for bankruptcy, putting 90,000 jobs at risk.

The shutdown of the stores makes it impossible for Soltau to act on her turnaround plan for J.C. Penney, which had reported eight straight quarters of falling revenue. Department stores are struggling to adapt to a broad change in consumer preferences — a trend that will likely be exacerbated by the pandemic.

The 118-year-old chain is getting advice from Kirkland & Ellis LLP, Lazard Ltd. and AlixPartners LLP. A spokesman for AlixPartners declined to comment, and the other firms didn’t immediately respond to a request for comment.

Some J.C. Penney creditors are wary about owning the reorganized company if it were to file for bankruptcy, the people said. A common way to restructure in bankruptcy is to hand the equity over to the lenders, but retail remains under pressure.

Other creditors are supportive of an out-of-court restructuring that would see J.C. Penney buy back bonds at a discount and have stakeholders put in new money, the people said.

Going bankrupt and trying to reorganize during a quarantine could be disastrous for retailers, with stores shuttered and revenue slowed to a trickle. But forcing a retailer into liquidation could be equally problematic because it’s impossible to hold going-out-of-business sales if the chain is shut down, potentially leaving even less money for creditors.

J.C. Penney has 840 stores that have now all gone dark in response to the coronavirus pandemic, and there is no set date for them to reopen. Still, the company isn’t under immediate pressure to file for bankruptcy because it has about $1.6 billion of cash and unencumbered real estate assets, which could be used to secure new debt.