Is there a way to salvage baseball season?

Dr. Anthony Fauci, the voice and face of the federal government’s coronavirus task force, thinks so. Actually, the Washington National fan hopes so. He just doesn’t expect to see a game in person. And, he said, neither should you.

As part of an ongoing series of Snapchat interviews that have also been published by Vanity Fair, Fauci, on Wednesday, endorsed the idea and viability of games without fans. He even mentioned maybe July 4 could be an opening weekend. Not that there is going to be any need for flyovers.

“There's a way of doing that,” Fauci told Snapchat's Peter Hamby about upcoming sports seasons, including the NFL and college football. “Nobody comes to the stadium. Put them [the players] in big hotels, wherever you want to play, keep them very well surveilled. ... Have them tested every single week and make sure they don't wind up infecting each other or their family, and just let them play the season out. I mean, that’s a really artificial way to do it, but when you think about it, it might be better than nothing.”

In theory, it sounds possible, at least in the short-term. It is one idea Major League Baseball has been discussing: Moving teams either to Arizona spring training sites or separating leagues into Arizona- and Florida-based entities and playing without fans.

Fauci said he thought enough fans, deprived of any sports, would “buy-in” to simply being able to watch from home. He included himself.

“We have the World Champions here,” he said of the Nationals. “I want to see them again.”

Hey, he might even be willing to watch the Houston Astros.

As for players and team officials, however, there is a long way to go from in principle to practical. There are real obstacles to overcome. Would players be separated from their families and for how long? What about essential services, like, for example, food; how would those be handled? Who would be deemed essential to the operation of the sport?

They are the kinds of questions management and players are trying to tackle.

“I think MLB and ownership groups are trying to figure out some way to play the game, safely,” Rangers manager Chris Woodward said on a conference call Tuesday. “But it’s hard to imagine because there are so many layers involved with getting everybody in one place and safely. There are a lot of questions that have to be asked and will continue to be asked. Until then, it’s hard to really have an opinion. I’m confident that MLB will do everything it can to put safety first.”

On Tuesday, Commissioner Rob Manfred said on FOX Business that the only “plan” baseball has is to play when it is safe. Manfred called MLB’s talks at this point “ideas.”

“The only decision we have made, the only real plan that we have, is that baseball is not going to return until the public health situation is improved to the point that we’re comfortable that we can play games in a manner that is safe for our players, our employees, our fans and in a way that will not impact the public health situation adversely,” Manfred said.

“Right now, it’s largely a waiting game,” he added. “During that period, as you might expect any business would, we have engaged in contingency planning. We thought about how we might be able to return in various scenarios but again the key is the improvement in the public health situation.”

For now, it simply means the Rangers continue to use technology to maintain contact and monitor players as they do the best they can to keep in shape. Some players have been able to start to access Globe Life Field in very small, staggered groups of no more than two or three at a time.

Woodward said that when, or if, the Rangers reconvene, the club will not push pitchers it deems unready to go forward. Woodward added he has confidence in the work ethic of the Rangers’ five veteran starters: Lance Lynn, Mike Minor, Corey Kluber, Kyle Gibson and Jordan Lyles.

“We don’t want to hurt anybody,” he said. “We’re not going to rush guys or pitch them too much, if they aren’t ready for the sake of a couple of innings.

“I think when we do get back, it’s going to be a grind mentally,” he added. “There will be some frustration because guys aren’t going to be where they want to be when we get back. Right now, everybody is kind of settling into home and the more we are all here, the more normal it gets with each day. When we get back, the teams that are the mentally toughest are going to be the ones that have the most success.”

Especially if they have to be isolated from their families for the duration of whatever constitutes a season.

Find more Rangers stories from The Dallas Morning News here.