And on Wednesday, when the F.A.A. joined other nations in grounding the planes, the agency insisted that it was acting because it had obtained new evidence. Daniel Elwell, the agency’s acting administrator, defended the pace of its decision-making, telling NPR on Thursday, “We’re a data-driven organization. … We make safety decisions based on what we know.”

There were no crashes between the two decisions , but the difference remains significant. Both regulators had the same information in hand and, for roughly 24 hours, the F.A.A. decided to subject American airline employees and passengers to a greater degree of risk.

The difference in risk tolerance is only part of the story. The Trump administration has openly discouraged the enforcement of a wide range of existing federal regulations. The Wall Street Journal reported the total value of fines imposed on commercial airlines by the F.A.A. in 2018 was 88 percent lower than the total value of fines in 2016. The White House last year proposed to reduce funding and staffing for the F.A.A.’s Aviation Safety Office .

Also, nations often are more reluctant to crack down on domestic companies. Mr. Elwell has insisted that the F.A.A. made its decisions solely on the basis of safety. But if safety was the only consideration, then any risk would have warranted action. The F.A.A. is necessarily in the business of balancing the economic benefits of aviation against the safety of passengers. And the economic benefits include Boeing’s role as a major employer and exporter.

But the calibration of regulation still plays an important role.

The 1992 Maastricht Treaty, which started the project of creating a single set of European regulations, enshrined a “precautionary principle,” meaning that government can impose restrictions even when there is not clear evidence of harm. “Those in public office have a duty not to wait until their worst fears are realized,” Robert Coleman, then the European Commission’s director general for health and consumer protection, said in 2002.