CLOSE

Arizona Gives Day, April 7, 2020. (Photo: Southwest Human Development)

Final Arizona Gives Day numbers are in. Nearly 39,000 Arizonans donated $6.1 million during the annual event on April 7 — about $2 million more than initial estimates.

The funds will be distributed to 913 nonprofit organizations that participated in the 24-hour giving event.

The final numbers include $150,757 from the Nonprofit Emergency Relief Fund, prize pool distributions of more than $193,500 and offline donations that came in after the 24-hour online fundraiser ended.

Started in 2013 by the Alliance of Arizona Nonprofits and Arizona Grantmakers Forum, this is the first time donations surpassed $3.6 million.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

"Here we are, more than 10 days after the event officially ended, and we are still stunned by the astonishing response to Arizona Gives Day when hundreds of thousands of people in our state are not working because of the COVID-19 pandemic," said Alliance of Arizona Nonprofits CEO Kristen Merrifield.

"To say we are grateful on behalf of the nonprofits across Arizona doesn’t even begin to express how we feel about the people of our state."

Arizona Gives Day is just one of the ways Arizonans are donating to aid nonprofits during the pandemic.

To assist donors and people who need help, The Arizona Republic/azcentral also has published a searchable database with information about Arizona nonprofits, explaining what services they provide and what their needs are.

More than 200 organizations are listed including Phoenix nonprofit Control Alt Delete. The organization helps individuals looking to leave violent domestic situations.

"We have helped many people escape abuse after finding out about Control Alt Delete on this guide," said Founder and President, Laura Pahules. "Together we are creating a society of survivors."

Several other COVID-19 relief funds have been set up to help Arizona nonprofits:

The Arizona Community Foundation COVID-19 relief fund. Visit azfoundation.org to donate.

The Alliance of Arizona Nonprofits COVID-19 relief fund. Visit azgives.org to donate.

The United Way's United for the Valley COVID-19 Fund Visit vsuw.org to donate.

The Arizona Republic's Season for Sharing donations are accepted year-round at sharing.azcentral.com.

Elizabeth Montgomery is a producer for The Arizona Republic, azcentral.com and the Arizona Storytellers. Reach her at emontgomery@azcentral.com or 602-444-8764.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona/2020/04/17/arizona-gives-day-raised-more-than-6-million-for-phoenix-area-nonprofits/5156117002/