It seems that coronavirus has made another media star. Much to the chagrin of Jim Acosta who, it now seems to be universally accepted, participates in White House briefings only as a useful foil for the Donald Trump Show’s ratings, the newest darling is PBS Newshour correspondent (and NBC/MSNBC contributor of course) Yamiche Alcindor.

She’s the latest in the long string of “heroic” journalists all celebrated by their fellow journalists as speaking truth to power or some such. Never mind that it would be one of life’s easiest tasks to point out that one of the real “powers” that desperately needs someone to call out and speak truth to is the American mainstream media.

Regardless, Yamiche has become a favorite of the anti-Trump legions in the Democrat Media Complex; but it seems their puffery has gone quickly to her head. How bad? She’s come down with a pretty obvious emerging case of Acosticitis. Take this magnificent moment:

ALCINDOR: I have a–thank you. I have a quick question for you. You said that African-Americans and Latinos should avoid alcohol, drugs, and tobacco. You also said do it for your Abuela and do it for Big Mama and Pop-Pop. There are some people already —



ADAMS: — I said granddaddy too.



ALCINDOR: There are some people online that are already offended by that language and the idea that you’re saying behaviors might be leaning to these high death rates. Could you talk about whether or not people –could you, I guess, have a response for people who might be offended by the language that you used?

“Some people online that are already offended.” Amazing. If that is the standard by which political leaders are going to be questioned and held to account – that “some people online” are offended – then we might as well cancel any and all Q&A media sessions going forward.

Not to mention the outright stupidity of finding racism in a black Surgeon General using colloquial terms for relatives that are cross-racial and used endearingly anyway. If you don’t believe me, check out this gem (and pardon the language):

Not to mention, isn’t it always interesting that these things became offensive the precise moment a Republican was sitting in the White House, as evidenced here:

Surgeon General: Do it for Pop Pop, for Abuela, for Grandaddy



Media: That’s offensive.



Obama: Get Uncle Joe to vote, get Pookie to vote, get Javier to vote



Media: ….. pic.twitter.com/YgfBLxddn5 — The Daily Wire (@realDailyWire) April 10, 2020

Look, I’m all for the media having their own heroes – as in, people they applaud and champion because of their proficiency in advancing the left-wing narrative that guides their industry. But Yamiche Alcindor needs to up her game, lest she find herself quickly confined to Club Acosta.