These 10 household essentials are selling out—here’s where you can still get them

Cleaning products like disinfectant spray is selling out—this is where you can still get them. (Photo: Getty Images / Wojtek Skora)

— Recommendations are independently chosen by Reviewed’s editors. Purchases you make through our links may earn us a commission.

Editor's note: We are no longer updating the story. Click here for our updated story on where to buy household essentials.

In response to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and recommendations for social distancing, many people are making sure their homes are stocked with cleaning and household essentials, per recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), alongside a few products that'll keep you entertained while in self-quarantine.

But household essentials are selling out at many online retailers. From hand sanitizer to toilet paper to thermometers, these products can help you and those you live with feel prepared during a self-quarantine or if anyone gets sick. But they are becoming hard to find online, which can be especially stressful when you're trying to shop without leaving the house.

We’ve rounded up 10 of the most hard-to-find household products to have during the coronavirus outbreak and where to get them before they sell out. There may be shipping delays because of increased demand, but we'll be including the products most likely to get to you the fastest. We'll also continue to update this list as supplies dwindle and restocks, so be sure to check back often.

Need help finding products?Sign up for our weekly newsletter. It’s free and you can unsubscribe at any time.

1. Hand sanitizer and wipes

Purell Hand Sanitizer (Photo: Getty Images)

Hand sanitizers from Purell and GermX are flying off the shelves right now, but you should be picky because the truth is, they’re not all the same. Some contain an alcohol substitute known as benzalkonium chloride, which isn’t as effective if you’re trying to stop the spread of germs. Instead, you want to look for a hand sanitizer that has at least 60% alcohol content, according to the CDC.

But these items are selling out fast (seriously, you may even have to go in-store to grab them), so we definitely suggest you grab them as soon as possible. Or, you could just make your own, especially since the World Health Organization (WHO) just put together this do-it-yourself guide to creating your own sanitizer. Word of caution though—their step-by-step instructions do require 96% ethyl alcohol.

2. Hand soap

Washing of hands with soap under running water. (Photo: hxdbzxy/Getty Images/iStockphoto)

According to the CDC, one of the best things you can do right now to prevent the spread of coronavirus is to wash your hands frequently. That means scrubbing them after you use the bathroom, ride public transportation, blow your nose, cough, or sneeze, as well as before you eat. The American Red Cross also recommends that you wash your hands for at least 20 seconds in order to effectively clean them. While antibacterial soap is crucial, just regular hand-washing is a crucial way to stop germs from spreading.

3. Toilet Paper

The Best Toilet Paper (Photo: Getty)

During natural disasters and other emergencies, toilet paper always seems to be the first thing to go out of stock. The thought of running out of wipes to do your business when you can’t leave the house is absolutely horrifying. While we ranked the Charmin Ultra Soft as the No. 1 toilet paper for your No. 2, in times like these, you’re better off taking what your can get—even if it’s one-ply. Here are all the places you can still order toilet paper from.

4. Paper Towels

Best things to buy at Target: Bounty paper towels. (Photo: Reviewed/Jessa Rose Photography)

In most instances, paper towels can seem wasteful. While they’re definitely a popular household purchase—and we’ve even rounded up a list of the best paper towels you can buy right now—they’re not eco-friendly and they’re expensive, which can make them seem like a luxury to some households.

But the fact that paper towels are disposable actually could make them beneficial to have, particularly in homes where there’s already someone impacted by coronavirus. The CDC recommends paper towel usage for cleaning and disinfecting homes, which makes them good to have around, just in case.

5. Cleaning wipes

You can kill nasty germs with these disinfecting wipes. (Photo: Clorox)

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recently released a list of disinfectants that are safe for American households to use right now to protect against the coronavirus. One of the top disinfectants on the list? Clorox Disinfecting Wipes. Made to kill up to 99.9% of surface bacteria and viruses, these wipes are easy to use, safe on most surfaces, and essential to have around the house right now.

Editor's note: Cleaning wipes are currently sold out online, but we will update this with more options as soon as they come in stock.

6. Dish soap

Tackle those dirty dishes with this powerful soap. (Photo: Reviewed/Jackson Ruckar)

Dish soap is another household item, you’re going to want to have around. The CDC recommends that those who are affected by the coronavirus should not share dishes, drinking glasses, cups, or utensils. After these dishes have been used, they should be washed thoroughly with soap and water. When we tested the best dish soap, we washed more than 125 plates, glasses, bowls, and spoons, and found that Dawn Ultra was the clear winner. Not only does it cut through grease, but it’s a great disinfectant as well.

7. Thermometers

Shopping for thermometers online? Here's where to look. (Photo: rclassenlayouts/Getty Images/iStockphoto)

A thermometer is essential for knowing whether or not you have a fever, which is one of the main symptoms of the coronavirus, according to the CDC. With many people attempting to grab a thermometer that they're missing from their medicine drawer, there are very slim pickings in-store and online right now. Thankfully, you can still find a few online—though they may take a few days (or even weeks) to ship.

8. Disinfectant spray and cleaner

Kill germs around your home with the Lysol Disinfectant Spray. (Photo: Lysol)

Similar to cleaning wipes, disinfectant spray can help clear surfaces of harmful bacteria and potentially guard against the spread of coronavirus. The CDC recommends sticking to household cleaners with at least 70% alcohol, and most EPA-registered disinfectants—like Lysol Clean & Fresh Multi-Surface Cleaner, for example—should be effective for regular use. If you haven’t already grabbed a bottle or two, you can get this on Amazon right now, but we’d suggest you hurry and snag it fast, as it’s selling out everywhere.

9. Diapers

You can now buy a smart diaper for your baby—but is it worth the money? (Photo: Capuski/Getty Images)

If you’re stuck at home for an extended period of time, you absolutely don’t want to run out of diapers—it could be a mess, literally and figuratively. As you’re trying to plan ahead, you may want to buy a few extra boxes worth of diapers. Every baby is different though, and some diaper brands may work better than others, so we recommend you grab your brand (whichever it may be) and stockpile them.

10. Tissues

Never underestimate the value of a good tissue. (Photo: Reviewed/Jackson Ruckar)

Although the major symptoms of coronavirus include a dry cough, fever, and shortness of breath, according to the CDC, it's always a good idea to have an extra box of tissues lying around. You could wind up with a runny nose due to allergies or get the cold or flu. After testing nine different boxes (and blowing many noses), we found that Puffs Ultra Soft are the best tissues and won't irritate your nose. You can stock up on these on Amazon right now. Other brands still have tissues in stock, too.

These aren't the only things selling out, non-essential items like fitness products, board games, and more are going quickly too. We'll be covering the inventory of these high-demand items, too:

The product experts at Reviewed have all your shopping needs covered. Follow Reviewed on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram for the latest deals, reviews, and more.

Prices were accurate at the time this article was published but may change over time.

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/reviewedcom/2020/03/30/where-buy-sold-out-household-essentials-toilet-paper-hand-sanitizer-disinfectant-wipes-and-more/5087376002/