As we introduce the second episode of Meat with the Press, which we filmed in early February, a brief story:

The first time I met Elvis Andrus was in the fall of 2007 at instructional league in Arizona. He was one of the young players the Rangers had acquired that summer in deals with Atlanta, Boston and Cleveland.

He had just turned 19. He told me he wanted to be just like Derek Jeter. There was life in his eyes.

I went back to my hotel and wrote about how impressed I was … by Engel Beltre.

Beltre was another one of those kids, acquired from Boston for Eric Gagne. He was the epitome of a “projectable” star. A lean, athletic center fielder who flashed big-time power and had a high-voltage personality. He went on to have 40 major league at-bats. Scouting was never my future.

Andrus also left an impression. He continues to do so nearly 13 years later, the last 11 of them as a major leaguer.

If this season ever gets underway, Andrus is going to continue to chip away at Michael Young’s franchise record for games played and hits. He is within 200 games of Young (1,823) and about 500 hits shy of him (2,230).

He can be playful. Sometimes to the extreme. Just ask anybody about the music in the clubhouse.

More than anything, though, he’s a candid, honest player, unafraid to take responsibility when things go wrong. Who can forget him tearfully answering question after question after his dreadful seventh inning in the 2015 ALDS?

He is going to go down as one of the most memorable players and personalities in the history of the Texas Rangers.

For our second episode of Meat with The Press, he was the perfect subject. And since Andrus lives north of Dallas, we thought sharing barbecue at Tender Smokehouse would be a perfect match. Tender is owned and operated by nine-time Gold Glove winner Torii Hunter, who had the same effervescent personality and energy on the field. Besides, brisket, beef and pork ribs and sausage is a good start to any conversation.

We hope you enjoy it!

To help support future products like this, subscribe to SportsDay with the promo code MEAT to receive one free month

Subscribe: Click this link

Code: MEAT

- Sign up for our FREE Rangers newsletter here.

- Find more Rangers stories from The Dallas Morning News here.