You may think that it’s fun to walk in the shoes of celebrities — but here are some photos of tortured feet that may change your mind! The National ENQUIRER talked to fashion insiders and some dedicated foot fetishists for their own takes on showbiz’s worst offenders when it comes to taking off shoes. Nobody’s watching the red carpet more closely than the feet fans who are finally unloading on the beauties who have the most beastly toes, heels and arches in Hollywood! Click through the gallery above for the ugliest celebrity hooves!

Hollywood’s Ugliest Hooves — Big Stars Whose Feet Really Stink 1 of 11 Close gallery 1 of 11 Sarah Jessica Parker The ENQUIRER found that the The ENQUIRER found that the Sex and the City star doesn't have many fans on one of the internet's leading foot-fetish sites. Said one disgusted commenter: “Man! Those are some veiny, hammer-toed talons!” Photo credit: Getty Images 2 of 11 Jennifer Aniston The Friends star doesn't have friends in the foot-fetish community, either. Jennifer may have been one of the '90s leading sex symbols, but a foot fan said that it “looks like she borrowed Arnold Schwarzenegger’s feet!” Photo credit: Getty Images 3 of 11 Kim Kardashian Unsightly cankles are the least of the reality star’s problems! “She is experiencing the beginning of ‘hammertoe,’” revealed an insider. “She’s looking to get it fixed before it becomes obvious.” Photo credit: FameFlynet 4 of 11 Jennifer Garner With these crazy, crooked toes, the former Alias star probably wishes she had a way to disguise her feet! But the mother of three still tries to put her best foot forward with perky pedicures. Photo credit: FameFlynet 5 of 11 Jessica Simpson You’d think someone who designs shoes could actually find some footwear that fits! But the singer and fashion mogul can’t seem to contain her freaky toes that tap the pavement with every painful-looking step. Photo credit: photodesk@splashnews 6 of 11 Halle Berry The gorgeous Oscar-winner has some scary-skinny feet, with a nasty bump that almost looks like a sixth toe! But that doesn't mean Halle is shy about stepping out! Photo credit: BACKGRID 7 of 11 Christina Hendricks Even the Mad Men bombshell is capable of sporting an ugly secret — in this case, a bumpy bunion! Photo credit: Getty Images 8 of 11 Iman While it’s tempting to say the former supermodel is perfect from head to toe, that would be a lie! A strappy sandal revealed the shocking truth about the statuesque stunner — she’s got a lumpy, bumpy foot! Photo credit: FilmMagic 9 of 11 Paris Hilton The hotel heiress has some bony and bumpy toes, but those jumbo size 11s are hard to hide! The poor little rich girl has complained designer footwear can “look like clown shoes on me!” Photo credit: Getty Images 10 of 11 Britney Spears At least this star doesn't have outsiders mocking the look of her toes. Instead, insiders are blasting the smell of Britney's feet! “They stink to high heaven when she takes her shoes off,” a source claimed to The ENQUIRER in 2018. “It’s more than just calluses — Britney’s poor feet smell like they’ve got some kind of fungus!” Photo credit: Getty Images 11 of 11 Steven Tyler The Aerosmith frontman and former American Idol judge can paint his nails any color he wants, but there’s no way to camouflage those terrible toes — which are bad enough to make him the only man on the worst-heeled list! Photo credit: BACKGRID Share this: Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Sarah Jessica Parker The ENQUIRER found that the The ENQUIRER found that the Sex and the City star doesn't have many fans on one of the internet's leading foot-fetish sites. Said one disgusted commenter: “Man! Those are some veiny, hammer-toed talons!” Photo credit: Getty Images Jennifer Aniston The Friends star doesn't have friends in the foot-fetish community, either. Jennifer may have been one of the '90s leading sex symbols, but a foot fan said that it “looks like she borrowed Arnold Schwarzenegger’s feet!” Photo credit: Getty Images Kim Kardashian Unsightly cankles are the least of the reality star’s problems! “She is experiencing the beginning of ‘hammertoe,’” revealed an insider. “She’s looking to get it fixed before it becomes obvious.” Photo credit: FameFlynet Jennifer Garner With these crazy, crooked toes, the former Alias star probably wishes she had a way to disguise her feet! But the mother of three still tries to put her best foot forward with perky pedicures. Photo credit: FameFlynet Jessica Simpson You’d think someone who designs shoes could actually find some footwear that fits! But the singer and fashion mogul can’t seem to contain her freaky toes that tap the pavement with every painful-looking step. Photo credit: photodesk@splashnews Halle Berry The gorgeous Oscar-winner has some scary-skinny feet, with a nasty bump that almost looks like a sixth toe! But that doesn't mean Halle is shy about stepping out! Photo credit: BACKGRID Christina Hendricks Even the Mad Men bombshell is capable of sporting an ugly secret — in this case, a bumpy bunion! Photo credit: Getty Images Iman While it’s tempting to say the former supermodel is perfect from head to toe, that would be a lie! A strappy sandal revealed the shocking truth about the statuesque stunner — she’s got a lumpy, bumpy foot! Photo credit: FilmMagic Paris Hilton The hotel heiress has some bony and bumpy toes, but those jumbo size 11s are hard to hide! The poor little rich girl has complained designer footwear can “look like clown shoes on me!” Photo credit: Getty Images Britney Spears At least this star doesn't have outsiders mocking the look of her toes. Instead, insiders are blasting the smell of Britney's feet! “They stink to high heaven when she takes her shoes off,” a source claimed to The ENQUIRER in 2018. “It’s more than just calluses — Britney’s poor feet smell like they’ve got some kind of fungus!” Photo credit: Getty Images Steven Tyler The Aerosmith frontman and former American Idol judge can paint his nails any color he wants, but there’s no way to camouflage those terrible toes — which are bad enough to make him the only man on the worst-heeled list! Photo credit: BACKGRID