A NewsOne gallery of the celebrities we lost in 2017.

1. Erica Garner, 27 Source:Getty Erica Garner, a social justice advocate and daughter of Eric Garner who was killed by a New York Police officer, died Saturday, December 30, at Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center in Brooklyn. She died just days after being treated for a heart attack, according to her mother, Esaw Snipes.

2. LeRoy Frasier, 80 Source:Getty LeRoy Frasier, who alongside his brother and another high school student, was among the first Black students to successfully challenge racial segregation at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill. He died of heart failure Friday, December 29, at a New York City hospital.

3. Don Hogan Charles, 79 Source:Getty Don Hogan Charles, who documented the civil rights movement via photos and was the first Black photographer hired by the New York Times, died Friday, December 15. Pictured: Charles’ photo of a protest over the arrest and jailing of Black Panthers members at a criminal court building in New York City on April 3, 1969.

4. Combat Jack, 48 Source:Getty Reggie Ossé, also known as Combat Jack, died Wednesday, December 20 following a battle with colon cancer. He was a founding partner of the Loud Speakers Podcast network, and former managing editor of ‘The Source.’

5. Mamie Johnson, 82 Source:Getty Mamie “Peanut” Johnson, one of three women to play in the Negro Leagues, died Tuesday, December 20. She played with the Indianapolis Clowns from 1953-55, posting a 33-8 record and a .270 batting average.

6. Della Reese, 86 Source:Splash News Della Reese, the famed jazz, gospel singer, actress and ordained minister, died Sunday, November 19 at her Los Angeles, California, home.

7. Simeon Booker, 99 Source:Getty Simeon Booker, an award-winning journalist who wrote for The Washington Post, Ebony, and Jet during his more than 50 years career, died Friday, December 10 at an assisted living community in Solomons, Maryland.

8. David Cassidy, 67 Source:Getty David Cassidy, who rose to fame in his 1970s role as Keith Partridge on the popular Partridge Family sitcom, died of liver failure at a Florida hospital on Tuesday, November 21.

9. Fats Domino, 89 Source:Getty Fats Domino, the American Rock and roll singer, songwriter and pianist, died of natural causes Tuesday, October 24 in Louisiana. He was known for hits, including “Blueberry Hill,” and “Ain’t That a Shame.”

10. Robert Guillaume, 89 Source:Getty Robert Guillaume, known for his role on “Benson” and as Rafiki in Disney’s 1994 animated film “The Lion King,” died at his home Tuesday, October 24 following a battle with prostate cancer.

11. Tom Petty, 66 Source:Getty Tom Petty, known for his nasally southern singing voice as much as the wails of his guitar, died October 2 in Los Angeles after suffering a cardiac arrest.

12. Bernie Casey, 78 Source:Getty Bernie Casey, the actor, poet and former NFL player, died September 21 in Los Angeles. He appeared in a number of films and television series, including “I’m Gonna Git You Sucka,” and “L.A. Law.”

13. Jim Vance, 75 Source:Getty Jim Vance—an African-American TV news broacast pioneer, died after a battle with cancer on July 22. He was one of the first Black anchors at a major media network.

14. Fresh Kid Ice, 53 Source:Getty 2 Live Crew’s Christopher Wong Won, also known as Fresh Kid Ice, died at 7:50 AM on Thursday, July 13 at a Miami hospital of an undisclosed illness, according to the group’s manager.

15. Charlie Murphy, 57 Source:Getty Comedian Charlie Murphy, 57, died April 12 at a New York York City hospital after a battle with leukemia.

16. Chuck Berry, 90 Source:Getty Berry, father of rock ‘n’ roll, passed away Saturday, March 18 at his home near Wentzville, Missouri. Police found him unconscious, and he was pronounced dead after first responders failed to revive him. He was 90.

17. James Cotton, 81 Source:Getty The legendary blues musician known for his innovative harmonica style, died of pneumonia at St. David’s Medical Center in Austin, Texas on March 16. He was 81.

18. Joni Sledge, 60 Source:Getty Songstress Joni Sledge, a member of the group Sister Sledge, was discovered dead Friday, March 10 at her home Phoenix, Arizona. The group of sisters recorded the dance anthem “We Are Family” in 1979.

19. Clyde Stubblefield, 73 Source:Getty Clyde Stubblefield died of kidney failure on Saturday, February 18, at a Madison, Wisconsin hospital. A drummer for James Brown, Stubblefield was sampled “on 1000-plus songs, including Public Enemy’s ‘Fight the Power,’ Dr. Dre’s ‘Let Me Ride’ and George Michael’s ‘Freedom ’90,'” reports The Detroit News.

20. Al Jarreau, 76 Source:Getty Jazz legend and unique-voiced virtuoso Al Jarreau died February 12 at a Los Angeles hospital. A week earlier, he had had been hospitalized for exhaustion and was told by doctors that he had to retire from touring.

21. Mary Tyler Moore, 80 Source:Getty Moore, an award-winning actress, enjoyed a successful, decades-long career. She rose to fame as a regular on ‘The Dick Van Dyke Show’ in the 1960s, which led to the eponymous ‘Mary Tyler Moore Show’ in the 1970s. Moore died in a Connecticut hospital on January 25.

22. Lee “Q” O’Denat, 43 Source:Getty The media mogul known affectionately as “Q,” died on January 24 from heart failure after he was found unresponsive in a San Diego shopping center. O’Denat was responsible for creating WorldStarHipHop.com, a groundbreaking hub for entertainment and news pertaining to urban culture.

23. Bishop Eddie Long, 63 Source:Getty Bishop Long, a controversial Atlanta megachurch pastor, died on January 15 after a years long battle with an unspecified form of cancer. Rumors surrounding the pastor’s health swirled after he was spotted several times with a significantly thinner frame.