New face mask rules for Bay Area: When do I have to wear...

Though California has not yet mandated that everyone wear face coverings in public, Gov. Gavin Newsom said his administration is considering a requirement as they contemplate how to reopen the state.

“We are leaning in that direction, and we are very encouraged by the work that’s being done at the local level all throughout the state of California,” he said during a news conference on April 17.

The same day, several Bay Area counties announced they will require residents to wear face coverings in public as an interim step toward easing restrictions on social and commercial life.

Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, San Francisco and San Mateo counties mandated that people use basic nonmedical, cloth masks, including scarves and bandannas, to cover their noses and mouths when they leave home to go to the doctor, grocery store or other essential places — but not for exercise or while driving. The order does not apply to children 12 and younger.

Sonoma County had previously issued a similar order that took effect April 17.

Here’s a quick look at what you need to know about face masks or coverings and the coronavirus:

Q: Why do I need to wear a mask?

A: The virus that causes COVID-19 is most commonly transmitted through respiratory droplets when an infected person sneezes or coughs. These droplets can remain suspended in the air for up to three hours and be transmitted at least 13 feet by aerosols that are emitted by breathing or speaking, based on reports by the CDC.

Masks are effective in blocking, or at least limiting, your exposure to these contagious viral droplets and aerosol particles. Because we do not always know who is infected (many coronavirus cases are asymptomatic), you should also wear a mask to protect others.

While the best way to prevent transmission of the virus is to stay home, if necessary to go out for an essential errand, health officials require people to wear face coverings to slow the spread of the virus.

They caution against relying solely on masks and say people should continue frequent handwashing and maintaining physical distance from others.

Q: What kind of face mask should I wear?

A:When it comes to slowing the spread of the coronavirus, not all face masks are created equal.

While the critical shortage of personal protective equipment, or PPE, in hospitals worldwide has caused health care workers to resort to wearing a variety of coverings to treat patients - including bandannas, scarves and homemade devices - there are key distinctions between N95 respirators, surgical masks and other accessories.

Here’s a breakdown of how common masks work.

Surgical masks: Also known as procedure masks, these are used in a health care setting to reduce the number of potential contaminants that mask wearers release into the immediate environment. While these loose-fitting masks can protect against large splashes of droplets, water and sprays in medical facilities, they are largely ineffective for protection against the coronavirus because they allow particles to enter through the sides.

N95 respirators: These tight-fitting masks reduce wearers’ exposure to 95% of airborne particles, including small-particle aerosols, large droplets and viruses as small as 0.3 microns (the “N” stands for not resistant to oil).

N95 respirators, with an exhalation valve (or one-way vent): These are commonly used in Northern California during fire season but are not as effective as standard masks. They are designed to ease exhalation and decrease humidity, heat and moisture inside. But these are not ideal in blocking transmission of COVID-19. While they protect the wearer, they do not protect others from a potentially infected cough or sneeze due to their ability to release large respiratory droplets into the air, according to Dr. Matthew L. Springer at UCSF.

Face filtering piece: The N95 equivalent is primarily used to block dust and other particles for people who have respiratory issues. Its usefulness against the coronavirus depends on the level of filtration, from FFP1 (ineffective) to FFP3 (most effective).

Activated carbon mask: These masks are used to filter out common pollutants and tiny particles in the air, helping people with allergies. However, they block only 10% to 20% of viruses, making them largely ineffective against the coronavirus.

Bandannas, DIY masks and cloth coverings: Homemade face coverings may prevent the spread of infected droplets by asymptomatic individuals, but they provide significantly less effective protection than surgical or N95 masks. The CDC primarily recommends using these to keep the wearer’s face clean and reduce the likelihood that people will touch their faces.

Q: What is the proper way to wear masks?

A: WHO guidelines for effectively wearing a face mask are as follows:

• Before putting on a mask, clean hands with alcohol-based hand sanitizer or soap and water.

• Cover your mouth and nose with the mask and make sure there are no gaps between your face and the mask. They are not effective on people with excessive facial hair.

• Avoid touching the mask while using it. If you do, clean your hands immediately.

• Replace the mask with a new one as soon as it is damp.

• To remove the mask, take it off from behind (do not touch the front of mask); discard immediately in a closed bin; and wash or sanitize your hands.

• Do not reuse or share masks.

Q: Why is there a shortage of masks?

A: The panic that caused people to stockpile toilet paper and hand sanitizer as the pandemic spread also led to a global run on sales of face masks.

As a result, medical centers are facing severe shortages that are being attributed not just to high demand, but to disruptions in supply.

Most of the world’s surgical masks are made in China, where, according to the Associated Press, the coronavirus outbreak has caused shortages of workers; manufacturers say they are struggling to get enough raw materials to make the masks.

The early recommendations not to wear masks from the CDC and WHO were based on the scarcity of masks available to health care workers.

Q: Can I make my own mask from fabric?

A: Several templates for creating homemade masks are available online via a simple search.

Q: Is it safe to reuse a mask?

A: There are a number of risks associated with extended use and reuse of face masks, including self-contamination and degradation. Due to the critical shortage for health care workers, the CDC made allowances for cleaning and reusing N95 masks in a hospitals using special equipment. This is not recommended for home use. If you have more than one mask, you can rotate the masks; the virus is thought to last for two days on cloth surfaces.

Cloth masks should be washed between each use, in hot water with regular detergent, and dried completely on a high heat setting.

Always sanitize your hands after handling masks and do not touch your face.

Q: Can I donate my masks?

A: Yes, if they are the professional-grade kind sold in stores.

A detailed FAQ is available on SFChronicle.com about where to donate masks and other medical supplies.

Chronicle staff writers Sarah Ravani and Matthew Kawahara contributed to this report.

Aidin Vaziri is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: avaziri@sfchronicle.com