Gov. Newsom answers question on why he's not wearing a face covering at press briefings

California Gov. Gavin Newsom provides an update delivers a press briefing on COVID-19. California Gov. Gavin Newsom provides an update delivers a press briefing on COVID-19. Photo: California Governor's Office Photo: California Governor's Office Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Gov. Newsom answers question on why he's not wearing a face covering at press briefings 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

At a Friday briefing, California Gov. Gavin Newsom was asked why he doesn't wear a face covering in his daily press conferences.

The governor provides updates on the state's response to the COVID-19 pandemic Monday through Friday. Newsom usually delivers these from the State Operations Center in Sacramento but occasionally he has done them at remote locations such as Sleep Train Arena in Sacramento (the arena has been prepped to serve as a field hospital for a surge in coronavirus patients).

"Well, we’re here at the State Operations Center," Newsom said in response to the journalist's question. "If you saw the protocols to get in this room, you would understand how secure and protected this room is. We practice physical distancing. I haven’t been in public, we’ve been here for these press conferences."

While the governor has yet to issue an official order requiring residents to wear face masks, he has repeatedly encouraged people to use them in public situations where social distancing isn't possible. In the Bay Area, six counties — Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, San Francisco, San Mateo and Sonoma — have issued orders requiring masks. Individuals who don't follow the mandate can be cited and fined.

ALSO: These Bay Area counties are now requiring face masks

Continuing in his response to the question, Newsom reiterated the importance of coverings: "It is absolutely appropriate to wear face coverings, particularly when you’re going to the grocery store and doing other essential business if indeed you cannot practice physical distancing, it’s additive."

The governor also noted the state is preparing to relax the shelter-in-place order and reopen the economy, and in this next phase, face coverings will play a key role in curbing the spread of the virus. Newsom is encouraged by the requirements being issued on a local level and said the state is "leaning in that direction."

Newsom concluded that his family uses coverings when their daily lives bring them outside the home. "My entire household, from my kids to my wife on down, when they do the grocery store and do everything else, they try to not just preach as a family, they’re practicing by appropriately wearing face coverings as well."

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

Sign up for 'The Daily' newsletter for the latest on coronavirus here.

Amy Graff is a digital editor with SFGATE. Email her: agraff@sfgate.com.