Tweet Share New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo Behind every one of those numbers is an individual. There’s a family, there’s a mother, there’s a father, there’s a sister, there’s a brother. Quote icon

“Behind every one of those numbers is an individual,” New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said during a briefing on Tuesday, when New York reported 731 people had died from the virus. “There’s a family, there’s a mother, there’s a father, there’s a sister, there’s a brother."

COVID-19 works quickly and with lethal contagion, often forcing loved ones to die alone in hospital rooms, surrounded only by medical staff draped in protective gear and the dry rasp of ventilators.

There are also moments of hope and human triumph: neighbors stepping onto their balconies to cheer medical staff at dinnertime each evening. Homemade altars celebrating life in the face of so much death. A woman's determination to help a friend in need.

Coronavirus Chronicles: New Orleans can't grieve loved ones in traditional, festive way A boisterous jazz funeral would have been the proper send off for Leona “Chine” Grandison, a Treme local icon who passed away from COVID-19. Sandy Hooper, USA TODAY

In New York, there were 6,367 deaths

Jennie Moses got a phone call. Her longtime friend Eunice Oden had cold symptoms and a hint of fever. Moses pulled out the thermometer she bought some 20 years ago and walked three blocks to her friend’s apartment in Brooklyn's Crown Heights neighborhood.

“It’s about 20 years old if you want to try,’’ Moses, 79, said to her friend. "I guess it still works.’’

They cleaned it with alcohol swabs and dried it with a paper towel. Oden put it under her tongue. It showed 100.

The next morning, Moses called to say happy birthday. Oden was turning 78, but she wasn’t feeling well. She drove a few blocks to Interfaith Medical Center, where she was admitted. She asked her friend to bring her some things.

Show caption Hide caption Medical personnel wearing personal protective equipment remove a body from the Wyckoff Heights Medical Center to refrigerated containers parked outside, Thursday, April 2, 2020, in... Medical personnel wearing personal protective equipment remove a body from the Wyckoff Heights Medical Center to refrigerated containers parked outside, Thursday, April 2, 2020, in the Brooklyn borough of New York. As coronavirus hot spots and death tolls flared around the U.S., the nation's biggest city was the hardest hit of the all, with bodies loaded onto refrigerated morgue trucks by gurney and forklift outside overwhelmed hospitals, in full view of passing motorists. Mary Altaffer, AP

Moses packed her mask and gloves and took the bus to the hospital. Moses was determined to get the little red bag to her friend. Tucked inside were a toothbrush, slippers, a nightgown. She waited and waited, asking nurses when she'd able to see her friend. “We don’t know," she was told.

The friends had grown closer in recent years. They attended the same church and sometimes lunched at Applebee's, often ordering salad, sometimes treating themselves to french fries.

Oden's nephew was the one who called Moses with the news: Oden was dead.

By Saturday, New York City had tallied 6,367 deaths, by far the highest in the U.S. for a metropolitan area and nearly three-fourths of the state's total of 8,650.

Moses still can’t believe her friend is among those numbers. “She was all right, always willing to help,” she said.

She regrets never saying goodbye. But God had his own plans, Moses said.

"She was just meant to be here 78 years," she said. "Her job was done. He called her in."

'Tell grandma I love her'

Show caption Hide caption Dr. Elissa Szalkiewicz (left), Dr. Susana Bejar (middle), and Dr. Lauren Parks take a moment recently at the Columbia University Irving Medical Center in New... Dr. Elissa Szalkiewicz (left), Dr. Susana Bejar (middle), and Dr. Lauren Parks take a moment recently at the Columbia University Irving Medical Center in New York. Bejar said the staff has been working together to deal with the coronavirus outbreak. “Everyone is trying to figure out a way to help,’’ she said. Handout photo.

Of everything the virus takes, the chance to say goodbye is one of the cruelest. Dr. Susana Bejar, an internist at Columbia University Irving Medical Center in Manhattan, has been delivering short messages from family members to their loved ones:

"Tell grandma I love her."

"We're thinking about you."

"We love you."

The patients are often disoriented, their brains struggling to stay alive.

“They don’t know the month or the day or the present," Bejar said. "But if you say their son’s name ... they recognize that name.”

COVID-19 patients have overrun the hospital, taking up all floors, Bejar said. Gone are the days when doctors touched a shoulder to comfort a patient, she said. Medical staff touch as little as possible.

One of the hardest things to witness is the isolation that surrounds patients in the final moments of their lives, Bejar said. One elderly woman survived being HIV-positive and years in a nursing home only to be hospitalized with the virus. She died in her hospital bed, with only Bejar at her side.

“She made it through all that only to die one Sunday night with me in a hospital," she said. “She just passed away alone to the COVID one night, and I have no family to tell.”

'I try my best not to take it in'

With her Brooklyn floral shop closed because of the outbreak, Lynn Anderson is working from home designing artificial arrangements for funerals.

Her friends and customers at funeral homes in New York are overwhelmed, she said. Some can’t take more bodies. Some are doing “direct burials,” shipping bodies from the morgue straight to the cemetery. Others have limited viewings, with families looking at loved ones through glass.

Show caption Hide caption Lynn Anderson, owner of Lynn Florist, worked on a floral arrangement in her shop in the Brooklyn borough of New York City. The shop is... Lynn Anderson, owner of Lynn Florist, worked on a floral arrangement in her shop in the Brooklyn borough of New York City. The shop is temporarily closed because of the coronavirus. Anderson said she hopes the funeral arrangements she's working on from home will give grieving families some comfort. “I put so much love in it,’’ she said. Photo courtesy of Kyanna Anderson.

“I’m numb,’’ she said of the orders coming in. “I try my best not to take it in so much because then I won’t be able to perform my job.”

Recent orders include an arrangement of red and white flowers made of a silky material. Another will have yellow, purple and white flowers. There will be mostly roses, but there are lilies, too, and hydrangeas for fullness.

“Remember now, they can’t be choosy. They have to take what I have,’’ she said. “You can’t tell unless you go up and touch it.”

In Chicago, there were 453 deaths

On Thursday, Dr. Ponni Arunkumar, Cook County's chief medical examiner, drove 20 minutes through Chicago to a refrigerated warehouse.

The county morgue had overflowed with corpses, as had hospitals and funeral homes. The first bodies had been placed in the warehouse; many more were coming.

“We hope we don’t have to use all that capacity," she said, "but we’re prepared to.’’

Show caption Hide caption Family and friends of Chicago Police Officer Marco DiFranco, who had to stand outside during the funeral amid fears of the coronavirus pandemic, wave goodbye... Family and friends of Chicago Police Officer Marco DiFranco, who had to stand outside during the funeral amid fears of the coronavirus pandemic, wave goodbye as the hearse leaves Cumberland Funeral Chapels, Thursday, April 9, 2020, in Norridge, Ilinois. DiFranco, 50, died April 2 from complications from COVID-19, making him the first Chicago police officer to lose his life to the coronavirus. Ashlee Rezin Garcia, AP

As of Saturday, Illinois had reported 677 deaths, of which 453 were in Cook County, which includes Chicago.

Arunkumar sometimes springs awake in the middle of the night, thinking about the bodies.

"This is what we signed up for," she said. "We just have to carry through.”

Praying for the helpers

In this Tuesday, April 7, 2020 photo, nurse Amanda Chow has goggle marks on her face after leaving the room of a COVID-19 patient at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago, during the coronavirus pandemic. Brian Cassella, AP

Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago has a strict no-visitor policy. Sometimes they make exceptions.

On Sunday, Katie Martino, a nurse in the hospital's cardiac intensive care unit, had a patient, a woman in her 60s, who was slipping fast. She led two family members wearing face masks into the room. A short time later, the woman died.

Martino finished her shift and returned home, but that death lingered. The only solace she took away was that she had been able to get the family to the woman’s bedside before it was too late.

“Thankfully, we were able to give that to them,” she said.

On the days she’s not working, she joins a neighborhood prayer group. About 10 of them stand outside their houses and pray for Martino, for a firefighter who lives on the block, and for the patients they’re treating.

Screams, howls and clapping

On Wednesday, Patrice Rosenberg watched as an anesthesia team prepared to place a coronavirus patient on a ventilator at Northwestern Memorial.

As the registered nurse in charge of that COVID-19 intensive care unit that day, she was making her rounds, checking on 20 patients and 14 nurses.

Suddenly, Rosenberg realized she didn’t know the nurse responsible for that patient.

Coronavirus Chronicles: Chicago nurses share bright spots from a week on the front lines A group of nurses from Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago share the moments that have made the long, hard days worth it. Sandy Hooper, USA TODAY

“I looked at her ID, but she saw me,” Rosenberg said. “She busted me. I said, ‘I’m sorry, I don’t know who you are.’”

Those kinds of moments have become more frequent for Rosenberg, 29, as her hospital has converted three areas into COVID-19 intensive care units, with nurses flooding in from retirement, other departments and other hospitals to care for coronavirus patients.

Rosenberg has to learn the background of each new nurse, determine what they’re qualified for and get them up to speed on the hospital’s latest procedures for handling the pandemic.

Customers wear a variety of protective masks as they wait to enter a Trader Joe's store in Seattle on April 8, 2020. Elaine Thompson, AP

As her 12-hour shift drew to a close, Rosenberg debriefed the nurse who would take over that night. They ran over each patient, each nurse, each batch of medications on the floor.

She got home close to 8 p.m. and prepared for her usual routine – an immediate shower, dinner and sleep. But on this day, her boyfriend made her walk out to their rooftop and listen. She heard screams, howls and clapping.

Like so many other cities around the country, people in Chicago were making noise to honor the city’s health care workers. They were celebrating her.

Post-it Notes of hope

The good days have been few and far between for Sarita Mazurowski.

Just a few weeks ago, the registered nurse spent 45 minutes watching one of the first patients die from COVID-19 at Northwestern Memorial. With his family unable to be there for their own safety, it was up to Mazurowski to hold the patient's hand and deliver their final words.

Physicians were standing outside the room, instructing her on what medications to deliver, what measures to try.

In this Tuesday, April 7, 2020 photo, Dr. Srini V. Mukundan, right, reviews COVID-19 patient information with other medical staff in the ICU at Rush University Medical Center in Chicago, during the coronavirus pandemic. Brian Cassella, AP

“But in the end, it was just me and him,” she said.

She was in constant contact with the man's family. They kept asking her, over and over: "Please, I know that he’s sedated, I know that he probably won’t understand, but let him know we’re thinking about him, we love him, we wish we could be there for him."

Monday started off no different. Mazurowski, 31, was in charge of a COVID-19 intensive care unit and was making her rounds when she came across a name she recognized – a woman who was one of the first three coronavirus patients to enter the hospital.

The woman had been on a ventilator for three weeks, an ominous sign.

Stay safe and informed with updates from the Coronavirus Watch newsletter. Sign up

For those patients, nurses sometimes resort to “proning” them – turning the patient onto their stomach to open up air spaces in their back. It’s rough on the patient, but it’s sometimes used when options are running out. This woman had already been proned eight or nine times.

Hospital staff called her family and told them they didn't think she was going to make it.

But as Mazurowski started talking with the nurse in charge of that woman’s care, she heard something unexpected. Nurses had been weaning the patient off the ventilator, letting her lungs take over little by little. In fact, the nurse told Mazurowski that they were going to try to remove the ventilator completely that day.

It worked.

“I couldn’t stop talking about it to my co-workers,” she said, a smile stretching across her face. “Just being like, ‘Do you remember her? She’s coming off the ventilator today.’ And then the next day, it was like, ‘Oh my God, she’s leaving the ICU, she’s doing so well.’ She may have even been able to go home. Yeah. Yeah. Just amazing.”

That day, she noticed a giant, unused dry erase board. For each patient able to come off a ventilator and transfer out of the ICU, the staff began writing their names on Post-it Notes and sticking them on the board – a celebration of life.

In Seattle, there were 282 deaths

Darrell Owens checked in for his shift at the University of Washington Medical Center-Northwest in Seattle and braced for his first task of the day: Calling the family of a man in his 80s who had died overnight from the coronavirus.

The family hadn't seen the man in more than a month because he had been quarantined in a nursing home. He had checked into the emergency room the previous evening and died hours later.

As always, Owens, a nurse practitioner who heads the hospital's palliative care program, was careful to ask the relative where they were and who was with them.

He wants to make sure they aren't driving and they aren't alone.