These Bay Area counties are now requiring face masks

"Mask up Mill Valley" sign appears near downtown Mill Valley, Ca. "Mask up Mill Valley" sign appears near downtown Mill Valley, Ca. Photo: Blair Heagerty / SFGate Photo: Blair Heagerty / SFGate Image 1 of / 119 Caption Close These Bay Area counties are now requiring face masks 1 / 119 Back to Gallery

In the photo gallery above, see the face coverings residents of the Bay Area have fashioned.

Six Bay Area counties have issued orders requiring face coverings in public to reduce the spread of the coronavirus. Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, San Francisco, San Mateo and Sonoma counties are asking their residents to take this extra step in public settings to support the well-being of their communities. The city of Fremont also has its own mandate in effect.

In all of these locations, the requirement is enforceable by law and people who violate the rule can be cited and fined.

Santa Clara County is "strongly urging all individuals" to wear face coverings when out of their homes to perform essential activities, but has yet to issue an official requirement that's enforceable by law. In a statement, the county noted "enforcement resources across the county are limited" and the public has generally followed past guidance without enforcement.

The orders in all jurisdictions are generally the same, requiring people to wear coverings in public places, especially indoor spaces, where they're unable to physically distance. The mandates also include rules around wearing coverings.

The reason for the new rules is that research shows a cloth covering the nose and mouth can help prevent the spread of respiratory droplets that are the main way the coronavirus is transmitted between people.

In all jurisdictions, the coverings can be manufactured or handmade or simply any type of cloth fabric or soft material such as a bandana, scarf or neck gaiter. Medical masks aren't necessary and should be prioritized for healthcare workers.

Here's a quick overview of the orders in each jurisdiction.

Alameda: The order went into effect midnight on Friday. The county is requiring members of the public and workers to wear face coverings while inside of or waiting in line to enter essential businesses, when seeking healthcare, and when waiting for or riding on public transportation. Read the full order.

Berkeley: Anyone out in public visiting essential businesses, seeking healthcare or using public transportation, are required to use a face covering. Workers at essential businesses are also required to cover their face. The order goes into effect April 22 at 8 a.m. Read the full order.

Contra Costa: Anyone working at or visiting an essential business, such as a grocery store or gas station, is required to wear face coverings. The order does not require children 12 and younger to wear masks. The order goes into effect April 22. Read the full order.

Fremont: The East Bay city of Fremont is requiring workers and customers at essential businesses to wear face coverings amid the COVID-19 emergency. An employee can deny service to an individual who is not wearing a face covering. Read the full order.

Marin: Residents are being asked to wear a face covering when they are interacting with others who are not members of their household in public and private spaces. Children aged 12 years old or younger are not required to wear a face covering. The requirement goes into effect noon, April 22. Read the full order.

San Francisco: Residents and workers in SF will be required to wear face coverings at essential businesses, in public facilities and on transit. The rule took effect Friday night but officials will not begin enforcing it until 8 a.m., April 22. Read the full order.

San Mateo: The order mandates members of the public and workers at essential businesses to wear face coverings outside the home for certain activities and in places of business. The order took effect Friday night but will not be enforced until 8 a.m. on April 22. Read the full order.

Sonoma: All people must wear facial coverings before they enter any indoor facility besides their residence, any enclosed open space, or while outdoors when the person is unable to maintain a six-foot distance from another person at all times. Children over the age of 2 are being asked to wear face coverings. The requirement went into effect Friday. Read the full order.

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

Sign up for 'The Daily' newsletter for the latest on coronavirus here.

Amy Graff is a digital editor with SFGATE. Email her: agraff@sfgate.com.