John Solomon is the Editor-in-Chief of a new media outlet, JustTheNews, which is aimed at providing straight news without the biased commentary that has overcome the legacy media/corporate media over the past few years. That’s actually what we desperately need, as the legacy media have disgraced themselves with their incessant anti-Trump vitriol and have failed in their constitutional responsibility to operate as an “independent press” free of allegiances and obligations to special interests.

He is also a Fox News contributor and a regular on Sean Hannity’s program. He continues to break news on FISAgate, Spygate, and related topics on a regular basis, including this piece that included new information on the UK angle of Spygate, about which there has been a sprinkling of information and speculation over the past couple of years:

[Michael Flynn’s attorney Sidney Powell] confirmed that Mueller was fully aware of a letter sent in early January 2017 to Flynn from Britain’s national security adviser raising concerns about Steele’s credibility. The British government “hand-delivered” a letter to Flynn’s team that “totally disavowed any credibility of Christopher Steele, and would have completely destroyed the Russia collusion narrative,” Powell said. “I was told that a copy of the document would have been given to [then-National Security Adviser] Susan Rice as well,” she added. “So the Obama administration knew full well that the entire Russia collusion mess was a farce.”

That revelation opens up a ton of questions, including, “What did Obama know about Spygate, and when did he know it?”

Solomon elaborated on the UK’s likely involvement in Spygate in an interview by Lou Dobbs last Friday. Here is some of the Q&A:

Dobbs: [Moving on to] KT McFarland, former deputy National Security Adviser. She says a British intelligence official hinted to her that the country had aided the Obama Administration – that is the UK had aided the Obama Administration’s early so-called Russia collusion probe during the election. Was Obama part of that conspiracy? Solomon: It’s funny. We’re three-and-a-half years in, and we don’t know the answer to that. We don’t know what our foreign allies did to assist it. We’ve been told there’s evidence of it, but we don’t know what it is. But there’s a five-day window in January of 2017 – that same month when the case is falling apart where two things happened. KT McFarland, the incoming deputy NSA … her co-equal in Britain calls her and says, “Hey, we’re not going to comment on the leak of the Steele dossier.” That was the day that the Steele dossier came out on BuzzFeed. But he makes this incredible comment: “You know, it’s sometimes hard to tell when British intelligence ends and where American intelligence begins.” He was clearly signaling that the two had worked together on the early Trump case. A few days later, Mike Flynn gets a formal letter from the national security adviser of Britain telling him, “We don’t trust Christopher Steele. You should know that.” Those are now a matter of public record. The Brits were trying to tell the new president, “We might have had our hands dirty on this whole case.” Dobbs: And how many hands were dirty in the intelligence community, specifically US intelligence? I mean, the Australian ambassador, Mifsud in Italy, Christopher Steele and MI-6 in the UK. This is a very large coincidence, isn’t it? Solomon: There will be no coincidence in this. Somebody set these actions into motion, right? And the question is, who was it? And there may be a conglomerate. It may not be just one person; there might have been multiple operations going on. But there was a lot of foreign involvement targeting the Trump – and maybe even more than just Trump at the beginning of this whole episode.

End of the Q&A. Damn straight that “somebody set these actions into motion.” And that somebody is almost certainly former CIA director John Brennan, who has been mysteriously quiet of late (he went dark on Twitter after endorsing Biden right before Super Tuesday). It also provides a bit of context that would explain the abrupt resignation on 23 January 2017 of Robert Hannigan, the director of the UK’s Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ), which handles signals intelligence and cryptography for the UK’s intelligence services.

Solomon implies that there will be a lot more coming out in the ensuing weeks that will expose the entire Spygate operation – and maybe multiple concurrent operations, as he infers that other campaigns besides the Trump campaign may have also been spied on.

Surely US attorney John Durham has uncovered by now a lot more direct evidence that connects the foreign involvement in Spygate, including the UK, Italy, Australia, and maybe others. It’s high time we saw his “work product.”

The end.

Stu Cvrk served 30 years in the US Navy in a variety of active and reserve capacities, with considerable operational experience in the Middle East and the Western Pacific. An oceanographer and systems analyst through education and experience, Stu is a graduate of the US Naval Academy where he received a classical liberal education which serves as the key foundation for his political commentary. He threads daily on Twitter on a wide range of political, military, foreign policy, government, economics, and world affairs topics. Read more by Stu Cvrk