Democratic presidential candidate and former Vice President Joe Biden speaks to local residents during a community event, Wednesday, Aug. 7, 2019, in Burlington, Iowa. (AP Photo/Charlie Neibergall)

As I noted yesterday, Democrats and media figures alike have made it more than clear in the last three weeks that they were in no way, shape, or form interested in Tara Reade’s sexual assault allegations against Joe Biden, because Operation Protect The Precious was in full effect.

For example, the New York Times took 19 days to “report” on Reade’s allegations, and when they were called out for stealth-editing their story to make it more favorable to Biden, they admitted they did so because the Biden campaign complained.

Liberal Washington Post columnist Ruth Marcus, who believed Dr. Christine Blasey Ford’s allegations against then-SCOTUS nominee Brett Kavanaugh so much that she wrote a book about them, even penned a piece in which she declared that “#BelieveAllWomen was a dumb hashtag and a dumber approach” now that Biden stands accused.

The latest entrant to confirm their politically selective “outrage” on the issue of sexual assault allegations is CNN, who finally managed to “report” on the story weeks after it first broke, in stark contrast to the more than 700 real-time pieces they did on the allegations against Kavanaugh.

But did they frame it as a detailed examination of the facts as we know them so far? No. The story was framed in terms of how Democrats were “grappling” the allegations:

Democrats grapple with questions about Tara Reade's sexual assault allegation against Joe Biden – CNNPolitics https://t.co/1MMSEwUVAb — Jake Tapper (@jaketapper) April 17, 2020

Conservative commentator Stephen Miller absolutely destroyed them over the story:

So far everyone but Joe Biden has had to grapple with these allegations. It’s a good thing he hasn’t given any interviews to CNN or anyone else in the last 3 weeks or this would look like a massive failure of the media. https://t.co/jvKuiWaOan — Stephen L. Miller (@redsteeze) April 18, 2020

Not only that, but they put the story on their website on a Friday evening, when less people are usually clicking on stories to read:

Friday Night Newsdump. And this one not by @TheBabylonBee https://t.co/JdZIVZjwdZ — Rasmussen Reports (@Rasmussen_Poll) April 18, 2020

I’ll just say it again for the record: If the Democrats and the national media didn’t have double standards then they’d have absolutely no standards at all.

Based in North Carolina, Sister Toldjah is a former liberal and a 16+ year writer with an emphasis on media bias, social issues, and the culture wars. Read more by Sister Toldjah