Getty

Alas, poor Shopko, we knew you well—but it was a long time ago.

Shopko, the upper Midwest-based discounter that filed for Chapter 11 late last year, announced this week it is liquidating pretty much the rest of what still exists. That totals 120 stores that were initially going to remain open after the announcement of 250 closings at the time of the filing.

On its own, the demise of Shopko is neither surprising nor particularly crushing to the industry and its customers (though it certainly is for the thousands and thousands of employees about to be jobless).

But in the context of both what Shopko once was and what retailing overall has become, it is nothing short of tragic.

In its heyday, which wasn’t all that long ago, Shopko was as good a discount merchant as existed anywhere in retailing. Its stores were bright, shiny, freshly merchandised and cleverly marketed. In fact, as it emulated a strategy popularized by Target, some in the trade thought of it as Target Jr., successfully positioning itself as an alternative to the more mass-oriented plays of stores like Walmart and Kmart.

Shopko also made a smart move by staking its claim on the pharmacy and optical business as cornerstones of its strategy. It identified the health and wellness trend well before most other retailers and, as CVS is doing now, it worked to play this card as a way to differentiate its business.

Somewhere along the line, however, it all got dumbed down. The stores went down-market, making them much more a direct competitor to Walmart—never a good position in modern American retailing. The pharmacy business was sold off and while optical remained (and may be kept in some form after the rest of the stores are liquidated), it lost the impact it once had.

If you hadn’t been in a Shopko in a few years and visited one on your travels, as this reporter did last year, you were equal parts shocked and disappointed at what it had devolved into. Sadly, for the most part it won’t be missed.

But not to be missed is what its passing says about the bigger picture of retailing today:

It’s another retail operation owned by private equity—Sun Capital in this case—that proved the theory once again that retailers don’t throw off the kind of cash needed to pay down debt. We’ve seen way too many examples of this recently, with Payless and Gymboree being only the two most recent victims.

Chapter 11 increasingly means liquidation these days, not restructuring as it once did. Not too long ago retail operations that filed for bankruptcy really could return to the market, perhaps smaller and reformatted but still in business. Today, the overwhelming number of companies that file end up going down for good instead. All of that DIP-infused optimism and CEO-speak not withstanding, that’s become the norm.

Finally, Shopko’s demise signals that regional discounting is officially dead and buried. Once, before Walmart and Target (and even Kmart in its good times) expanded nationally, the country had lots of regional mass merchants, usually with 30 to 40 stores operating in maybe a dozen states. We remember Caldor and Bradlees and Ames from the Northeast, but they had counterparts all throughout the country. Today, other than Meijer’s and Fred Meyer (a weird coincidence, don’t you think?), there really aren’t any regionals left. And even those two are as much about grocery (the former having brought the hypermarket model to the U.S. years before Walmart and the latter now owned by Kroger) as they are about general merchandise.

So while the memory of Shopko will fade—probably fairly quickly—the significance of how and why it happened should serve as a benchmark moment for American retailing.

It is indeed a tragedy of Shakespearean dimensions.