The U.S. government will buy 30 million barrels of oil from producers amid a financial downturn for the industry.

The Department of Energy (DOE) announced Thursday it would conduct the sales to fill the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR), fulfilling a pledge by President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE to offer assistance to the oil industry as prices plummet with the twin threats of the coronavirus and a pricing war between Saudi Arabia and Russia.

“It is a common sense move. Everyone who has done any version of investing knows you try to buy low and sell high. The same goes with filling the SPR over time,” Energy Secretary Dan Brouillette said in a call with reporters.

ADVERTISEMENT

This initial purchase comes as oil has fallen to about $25 per barrel, down from roughly $50 a month ago and a steep decline from the average $60 pricetag for oil already in the reserve.

The 30 million barrel purchase announced Thursday is a far cry from Trump’s Friday pledge to fill America’s emergency fuel supply “right up to the top,” maxing out at 77 million barrels.

But DOE said it plans to hold additional sales, perhaps as soon as in two to three months, and is preparing to ask Congress for $3 billion to fill its fuel reserves.

The purchase comes as Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin Steven Terner MnuchinMcCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package 13 things to know for today on coronavirus On The Money: Millions wait for virus relief checks in major test for IRS | Senate misses deadline to replenish small-business loan program | Fresh produce goes to waste as coronavirus snarls supply chains MORE floated spending as much as $20 billion to assist the oil industry, figures Brouillette said the two had not discussed.

Stocking up on oil will no doubt anger some Democrats, who have repeatedly warned that coronavirus aid should include no lifelines for the fossil fuel industry.

ADVERTISEMENT

“Diverting public funds to bail out this industry will do nothing to stop the spread of this deadly virus or provide relief to those in need,” House lawmakers wrote in a Tuesday letter spearheaded by Rep. Nanette Diaz Barragán (D-Calif.). “A bailout tells the American public that fossil fuel investors can rely on U.S. taxpayers to cover their bills when the industry’s corporate executives’ risky investments don’t pan out.”

Democrats in the Senate echoed a similar sentiment, fearing that money spent propping up the oil industry will accelerate climate change.

“Using federal assistance—including low-interest loans, royalty relief, tax breaks, or strategic petroleum reserve purchases—in order to prop up oil companies would be a wasteful misuse of government resources that would exacerbate the climate crisis,” Sens. Ed Markey Edward (Ed) John MarkeyThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Senior Pa. banking official calls for another T package; Trump tips hat to govs Democratic senators: Airlines sitting on billion in 'customer cash' Fauci: Diseases like coronavirus 'don't just disappear' MORE (D-Mass.), Jeff Merkley Jeffrey (Jeff) Alan Merkley13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Trump WHO cuts meet with furious blowback Trump administration to rent 23M barrels of storage space to oil companies amid falling prices MORE (D-Ore.) and Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump inflames red state-blue state coronavirus divide Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (I-Vt.) wrote in a letter to Trump.

Purchasing 30 million barrels now, even with record low oil prices, would still carry a significant cost, coming in at just below $1 billion.

But Brouillette told reporters he feels confident he has the backing from Congress as it weighs future coronavirus relief packages.

Numerous Republicans have already expressed support for the purchase — House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyMcCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Freedom Caucus chair calls for GOP to reject additional funds for state, local governments Top Republican voices skepticism of rule change to allow remote voting MORE (R-Calif.) pegged it as “the right call.”

And when asked if he had personally heard pushback from Democrats, Brouilette simply said, “No, I have not.”

The offer to purchase crude is only open to small- and mid-sized U.S. companies with fewer than 5,000 employees. The oil itself must be produced within the U.S. as well.

With current prices, the U.S. could fill its petroleum reserve with less than $2.1 billion but Brouillette said he expects prices to begin to rise as coronavirus’s hold on the economy settles down, increasing the overall cost of filling the SPR. He also said the department may limit future purchases if oil prices rise rapidly, potentially due to a resolution between Saudi Arabia and Russia.

“We have every expectation that once we’re beyond this coronavirus pandemic we’re going to see a very robust upturn in demand and very strong economy coming back, but at this point in time we don’t know exactly when that will occur so we’re just trying to be as cautious and conservative as possible,” he said.

—Updated at 2:07 p.m.