John M. Newman

Opinion contributor

Amid the never-ending parade of negative publicity surrounding big tech companies, it can be difficult these days to remember that not everything involving the Internet is terrible. But bright spots do remain. A task as simple as booking a hotel, for example, was incredibly difficult and time-consuming in the pre-digital world. Silicon Valley may have its faults, but consumers clearly benefit from the ability to compare travel options online.

Unfortunately, what is good for consumers is not always welcome among established incumbents. Together, the hotel industry’s “Big 6” — Hilton, Marriott, Choice, IHG, Wyndham, and Hyatt — have gobbled up a majority of U.S. hotel rooms. Two pending antitrust lawsuits paint a compelling story of an agreement among these industry giants to stifle competition, raise prices, and prevent comparison shopping by consumers.

Late last month, a federal court in Illinois bolstered these claims by allowing one of the lawsuits to move forward, and this week, oral arguments are set in a second suit, brought by online travel agency TravelPass Group. Both portray a hidden conspiracy that may have had a harmful — and ongoing — impact on travelers.

Read more commentary:

Google, Facebook, Amazon: Warren's toothless break-up plan ignores real Big Tech threats

Donald Trump must bust Facebook, Amazon, Netflix, Google monopolies like Teddy Roosevelt.

Newspapers want anti-trust pass to handle Facebook, Google

To illustrate, try a simple experiment: Type “Marriott Dallas” into your Google search bar. Several years ago, that keyword search would likely have yielded a wide variety of paid advertisements at the top of the page. One of them may have linked directly to Marriott’s website. But others would have featured competing hotels — think Hilton, Hyatt, or Wyndham — as well as online travel agencies like Expedia and Priceline.

Today, your search results probably look quite different. Most consumers will see only one type of advertisement at the top of the results: a link directly to Marriott’s own websites. Competitor ads seem to have vanished altogether, and online travel agency ads are increasingly hard to find.

The change was abrupt. Google search data suggests that, in late 2014, the Big 6 suddenly stopped bidding on one another’s branded keywords, according to one of the lawsuits.

Under the antitrust laws, collusion among competitors is regarded as “the supreme evil.” The adverse effects on consumers are typically immediate and substantial.

Hotel cabal wants to limit your choices

How might consumers be harmed by a collusive agreement among the Big 6? According to a 2014 Google study, keyword searching was the most common starting point for consumers seeking to book hotel rooms online. Even more importantly, Google found that consumers who searched for a specific hotel brand would often end up purchasing a room from another brand. Search results are an important driver of consumer behavior.

This type of searching and switching is essential for robust online competition — whether massive hotel groups like it or not.

And it occurs every day among consumers seeking out countless other products. We may initially look for Coca-Cola at the supermarket, or Nike trainers at a shoe store, but then end up trying a new or different brand after comparing products and prices. What healthy free-market system would allow Coke or Nike to collude with competitors to fence off their respective brands so that shoppers could see only the one brand they were initially seeking?

Yet the pending lawsuits against the Big 6 depict just such a restriction. Disturbingly, this may be part of a broader trend. The lawsuits come on the heels of the Federal Trade Commission’s decision in a case against 1-800 Contacts, which found that a similar agreement among another group of rivals unlawfully harmed competition and consumers.

Antitrust laws protect the public at large

Left to their own devices, companies in a variety of markets will choose to collude rather than compete. By stifling competition, collusive agreements can allow participants to raise prices, impose added fees, avoid competing on quality, and disadvantage innovative new challengers. In the context of online search, the danger is clear: as the FTC’s 1-800 Contacts opinion observes, search is the “very means” by which competition takes place in the modern digital economy.

A few years ago, online lending clearinghouse LendingTree made a splash with its slogan, “When banks compete, you win.” Unfortunately, the inverse is equally true: when companies stop competing, we lose. Antitrust laws can be an effective remedy, but only when they are actively enforced.

The private plaintiffs challenging the Big 6 hotel groups have already shed important light on an often opaque market. But antitrust laws are also about protecting the public at large, and if collusive agreements are not halted in one market, they may well spread to others. State attorneys general and the U.S. Department of Justice, along with the Federal Trade Commission, have all signaled their desire to promote online competition. This may be a good moment to join the fight.

John M. Newman is a law professor at the University of Memphis School of Law specializing in antitrust, a former trial attorney with the U.S. Department of Justice, and author of the forthcoming article “Antitrust in Digital Markets.”