It’s early yet, but the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination for 2020 already seems like the most substantive primary contest in recent memory. There’s a big idea on offer on nearly every major policy issue. Almost every candidate has backed either Medicare for All or another expansion of the government’s role in the provision of health insurance. Climate-policy discourse has been resuscitated by the Green New Deal, which has been endorsed by most of the top-tier contenders. Elizabeth Warren has advanced a slew of proposals, including, in just the past two months, a universal child-care program, a proposal to break up major tech firms, and a wealth tax. Kamala Harris wants to give generous cash payments to middle- and low-income Americans. Cory Booker has proposed giving a savings bond to every American newborn, and has introduced a bill that would legalize marijuana at the federal level, expunge marijuana-related convictions, and offer restitution to communities affected by the drug war. There is talk of reparations for African-Americans; several candidates have said that they would support a commission to study the issue.

Even amid this flurry of bold ideas, little has been said about how to move forward on the defining issue of the Trump era: immigration. An intervention finally came earlier this month, when the former Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julián Castro, a candidate running near the bottom of the pack, unveiled the first detailed immigration platform of the 2020 campaign. Not only is Castro calling for a reversal of Trump’s Muslim ban and wall spending; he also wants to decriminalize of the very act of crossing the border illegally, by repealing 1325, the section of the U.S. Code that makes unauthorized entry into the United States a federal crime.

Unauthorized border crossings were first criminalized in 1929, but the law was enforced with a new zeal, as Castro noted in a Medium post announcing his proposal, during the George W. Bush Administration, and it is “at the core of many of this administration’s most egregious immigration policies — from family separation to indiscriminate ICE raids to targeting asylum seekers.”

Castro envisions converting illegal entry from a criminal offense to a civil one and scaling back the existing enforcement regime by ending the use of for-profit detention facilities, breaking up Immigration and Customs Enforcement, dialling back Customs and Border Protection’s mandate to act within the United States, and refocussing deportation efforts on people who are convicted of serious crimes or considered a threat to national security.

Castro’s platform is bold in many ways—it would close the book not only on Trump’s immigration regime but on an enforcement paradigm that both preceded and enabled him. But his proposal contains few concrete suggestions for the establishment of a pathway to citizenship for the undocumented or for the reform of the existing system for legal immigration. In a conversation earlier this month, Alex Nowrasteh, a senior immigration-policy analyst at the libertarian Cato Institute, suggested that the Presidential candidates are unlikely to address legal immigration in a substantive way. “People are not that interested in the legal immigration system,” he said. “They’re almost entirely focussed on issues of border security and illegal immigration in the United States. I think legal immigration is the most important piece, but, politically, in terms of what moves people, gets them interested, shapes the debate, it’s the least important.”

Broad immigration reform is, obviously, also more politically difficult now, in a post-Trump climate. The Gang of Eight and the backers of the bipartisan reform push during the Bush years already faced an uphill climb, which has only been made steeper by the reinvigoration of right-wing nativism. Those prior reform efforts hinged on lawmakers’ ability to strike a bargain—a liberalization of the immigration system and a pathway to citizenship for the undocumented in exchange for tighter border security and the dogged enforcement of immigration laws. In supporting freer immigration and amnesty for the undocumented while also decriminalizing illegal entry and dismantling the existing enforcement regime, Castro’s platform suggests that the Democratic Party is now far less willing to make that trade. Nowrasteh thinks that Democrats are shifting their strategy for two reasons. “One, the realization that, during the Obama Administration, when they increased immigration enforcement dramatically, that did not provide a signal that Republicans could use to say, ‘This guy is serious about immigration, so we can reform the system.’ So it didn’t get any benefits,” he said. “And then, two, the fact that Trump is using the expanded immigration-enforcement system that he inherited from Obama and trying to do even more with it.”

“Castro’s new idea,” he continued, “is the realization that we have lost every reform battle, we have given the other side almost everything they want in terms of enforcement, but got nothing in return for trying to put it on the table.”

Tom Jawetz, the vice-president for immigration policy at the Center for American Progress Action Fund, noted that the liberalization-for-enforcement trade was always skewed heavily toward meeting the demands of immigration hard-liners. “We have been doing enforcement first for thirty years,” he said. “And we’ve been increasingly doing enforcement over the past eighteen years as we’ve been increasing the size of Border Patrol and ICE and immigration detention by a hundred, two hudred per cent, to the point where the immigration-enforcement budget was at eighteen billion dollars a year—it was greater than the budget of every other federal law-enforcement agency in the United States combined.”

Polls suggest that fewer and fewer Americans see immigration as a problem meriting that level of investment. In 2009, for instance, Pew found that forty per cent of the public believed that immigrants were mostly a burden, taking jobs and resources away from Americans. Today, only twenty-eight per cent believe that, with sixty-two per cent of Americans agreeing, instead, that immigrants mostly “strengthen our country because of their hard work and talents”—a sixteen-point jump from the forty-six per cent of Americans who agreed with that statement in 2009. According to Gallup, the proportion of Americans who support increasing immigration has grown from fourteen per cent, a decade ago, to thirty per cent today. This is a constituency just one percentage point smaller than the one that has driven American political discourse and punditry for the past four years: Americans who believe immigration should be decreased. A decade ago, half of the American public believed this. Now only thirty-one per cent do.

A Democratic Party that is more willing to talk affirmatively and unapologetically about the benefits of immigration will find itself well in tune with an electorate that, contrary to popular perception, is moving left on the issue. Castro’s platform is a step in that direction. Some immigration advocates are holding out hope that he or another candidate might go even further. Jawetz told me, “the border right now is so frequently described only as a security problem. It’s not viewed as an opportunity—where a cultural explosion takes place, where creativity is.” He suggested that Castro or Beto O’Rourke, who often talks about his roots in the border city of El Paso, could play a role in shifting that messaging. Really, any of the candidates might. The immigration lane is still wide open.