Can You Unlock the Cool Vibes of This '60s-Era Time Capsule in Utah? Built in 1969, this 4,000-square-foot, ranch-style home has been virtually untouched over the decades. Could you make over this midcentury modern?

Photo: Realtor.com Photo: Realtor.com Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Can You Unlock the Cool Vibes of This '60s-Era Time Capsule in Utah? 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

"We’re hoping for someone who wants to restore it and preserve it," says Christine Sadira, the listing agent for a midcentury modern home that is on the market for $1.4 million in Holladay, UT.

Built in 1969, the 4,000-square-foot, ranch-style home snagged three offers in its first 45 days on the market. What’s spurring the interest?

Well, it’s virtually untouched (and on only its third owner), and it's located in a spot where land is in high demand. Most lot sizes in the neighborhood are between 1 and 2 acres, and this home sits on a 1-acre lot.

Sadira says many of the houses in the neighborhood of a similar vintage have already been demolished, which might almost have been the fate of this one.

In 2015, the current owner snapped up the three-bedroom, 3.5-bath residence, intent on a major restoration, but is now letting it go.

Although the interiors remain untouched, one project the owner did complete was the removal of dead cottonwood trees, a $30,000 expense that a buyer doesn't have to worry about now.

“Now the lot looks completely different,” says Sadira. “It’s still got a lot of trees, but it’s more of a blank slate for someone to come in and design the landscape.”

The current owner's predecessor had held onto the home for around 40 years, without changing a thing. That means emerald-green shag carpeting in one room, a den that’s entirely paneled in wood, a concrete lattice wall in the living room, and a kitchen that would look right at home if the Brady Bunch lived here.

Floor-to-ceiling windows throughout—particularly on the entire upper floor, which accounts for the majority of the home's square footage—coax in natural light.

For anybody who works from home, two offices are carved into the existing layout: the aforementioned den and a narrow room with built-in bookshelves on opposing walls.

Exterior realtor.com

Entry realtor.com

Living room realtor.com

Original concrete trellis in the living room realtor.com

Kitchen realtor.com

Library realtor.com

Den realtor.com

One of the bedrooms realtor.com

Bedroom with wood paneling realtor.com

Three-season porch realtor.com

If the house looks familiar, it’s because it appeared in the indie comedy film “Brigsby Bear” (2017), starring Mark Hamill and Kyle Mooney. Locals may also recognize its interiors from commercials.

Despite the three offers, the home hasn’t sold yet.

“It’s been a tricky one,” admits Sadira. “It needs a restoration.”

The next owner is likely to want to start with a “more modern kitchen,” she says. Tearing out the carpet might be a great beginning. The next steps worth considering might be knocking a few walls down, and then updates to the bathrooms.

But the bones of the home are intact—and true to the period. Sadira says that when she took an architect on a walk-through recently, he kept proclaiming it a “masterpiece.” She says she hopes to find a buyer who “can just preserve the essence of that home.”

Given the lot size, “There’s room for a second house to be built there,” she says. “We’d love to see this home stay, and not be torn down.”

The post Can You Unlock the Cool Vibes of This '60s-Era Time Capsule in Utah? appeared first on Real Estate News & Insights | realtor.com®.