Ben Rhodes

Obama’s speech writer-turned-Iran-echo-chamber Ben Rhodes was ordered by Judge Royce Lamberth to answer questions under oath about the Benghazi scandal — but he appears to be defying the court order.

Even worse, the State Department and Justice Department are objecting to Judicial Watch who is now seeking an in-person interview with Mr. Rhodes!

In January, Judicial Watch submitted a court-ordered discovery plan seeking depositions of Obama-era officials connected to the Benghazi scandal, including Susan Rice and Ben Rhodes.

The discovery plan stems from a December, 2018 ruling by Judge Royce Lamberth ordering the State Department and DOJ to submit discovery in three areas.

TRENDING: THE END OF AN ERA: Drudge Goes Full Leftie - Loses President Trump-- Go to Pro-Trump News Instead

Judge Lamberth called Hillary Clinton’s use of the private email server “one of the gravest modern offenses to government transparency.”

Ben Rhodes is an Obama-era White House deputy strategic communications adviser who attempted to orchestrate a campaign to “reinforce” Obama and to portray the Benghazi consulate terrorist attack as being “rooted in an Internet video, and not a failure of policy,” Judicial Watch wrote in a blog post last week.

Judicial Watch seeks the depositions of former U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice and former White House Deputy Strategic Communications Adviser Ben Rhodes about the creation and dissemination of the infamous Benghazi talking points because: “No one other than these individuals know better who they were communicating with and where records might be located.”

Tuesday evening, Judicial Watch president Tom Fitton sounded the alarm.

“Obama White House official Ben Rhodes appears to be defying court order requiring he answer written questions under oath on Benghazi. Judicial Watch now seeks in-person testimony but DOJ/State objects!” Fitton said.

Obama WH official Ben Rhodes appears to be defying court order requiring he answer written questions under oath on Benghazi. @JudicialWatch now seeks in-person testimony but DOJ/State objects! @RealDonaldTrump should ask why! https://t.co/kka1QCEWtG pic.twitter.com/LUrtusN0Qw — Tom Fitton (@TomFitton) March 20, 2019

Once again the State Department and Justice Department are protecting a corrupt Obama official and blocking transparency.

Ben Rhodes, like every other Obama official believes he is above law and above a court order requiring he answer questions under oath.

You can support Tom Fitton and the team at Judicial Watch by clicking here.