CLOSE

As the Navajo Nation escalates its fight against an outbreak of COVID-19, five Navajo Police Department employees have tested positive for the new coronavirus, officials told The Arizona Republic on Tuesday.

The department's first two COVID-19 positive cases in an officer and a civilian support staffer were announced publicly on Tuesday morning, police department Chief Phillip Francisco told The Republic.

Since then, three more of the department's officers tested positive for COVID-19, he said.

When announcing its first two cases Tuesday morning, the department said it was notified of the positive COVID-19 cases on Monday and that the first two employees have since been placed in self-isolation and would be monitoring their symptoms.

“Our employee’s health and wellbeing is a priority and as essential employees working in the field of public safety, we are not immune from the possibility of having one of our law enforcement family contract the virus," Francisco said in a statement.

"As the numbers of positive cases increase across the Navajo Nation, so does our risk of being exposed," he continued. "The health and safety of our officers and the staff who work closely with them are a priority and we will monitor all personnel as we continue to provide essential services.”

According to Francisco, the department has about 350 employees in total, 205 of whom are commissioned officers.

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coronavirus coverage relating to public safety free of charge. Support The Republic by subscribing to azcentral.com.

The names and roles of the department's employees would not be released to protect their privacy, the department initially said.

During a live online town hall on Tuesday, Navajo Nation President Jonathan Nez referred to the department's first two COVID-19 positive employees as officers.

He noted that he and Vice President Myron Lizer were in self-quarantine after being in close proximity to an emergency medical technician who later tested positive for COVID-19. The tribe's leaders said they were doing fine and showed no symptoms about halfway through their two-week self-quarantine.

"Ladies and gentlemen, our first responders, our warriors on the front line are beginning to contract this virus," he said. "We need to stay home, it is no joke."

On Monday evening, the Navajo Nation reported 813 known cases of COVID-19 and 28 deaths related to the virus.

Over the weekend, the police department enforced the tribe's first 57-hour curfew between Friday night and early Monday. They set up checkpoints and issued more than 170 citations to anyone who violated the curfew.

Throughout the week, the police department will continue enforcing the tribe's nightly curfew in effect since March 30, ordering residents to stay home between 8 p.m. and 5 a.m. every day until further notice.

"Those people on the front lines are testing positive for COVID-19, and when they do they have to be sent home, over 14 days in isolation," Nez later said during the town hall on Tuesday.

"We can't afford two police officers to be sent home so that they can take care of themselves, we can't afford two to three weeks for our doctors and our nurses to stay home. It's up to us, ladies and gentlemen, to stay home and abide by these so that we don't have high numbers," he said.

Reach the reporter at chelsea.curtis@arizonarepublic.com or follow her on Twitter @curtis_chels.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-breaking/2020/04/14/two-navajo-nation-police-officers-diagnosed-covid-19/2993564001/