The Democratic senators for Michigan and Wisconsin announced their endorsements of Joe Biden Joe BidenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move GOP online donor platform expanded to state level Overnight Energy: US oil prices hit 18-year-low | Green groups, coal companies attack EPA power plant rollback from both sides | EPA weighs lifting ethanol requirements for oil refiners MORE’s presidential bid Wednesday as the former vice president seeks to make inroads in the crucial swing states.

Michigan Sens. Debbie Stabenow Deborah (Debbie) Ann StabenowDemocrats press USDA to create rural coronavirus task force Senate Democrats unveil plan to ramp up coronavirus testing that includes billion in emergency funding Michigan, Wisconsin Democratic senators endorse Biden MORE and Gary Peters Gary Charles PetersHere's where things stand 200 days before Election Day Michigan, Wisconsin Democratic senators endorse Biden Senate Republican: Coronavirus response has 'hampered' Hunter Biden investigation MORE and Wisconsin Sen. Tammy Baldwin Tammy Suzanne Baldwin13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Michigan, Wisconsin Democratic senators endorse Biden Biden's pick for vice president doesn't matter much MORE announced their support for Biden, who has all but locked up the 2020 Democratic nomination after Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump inflames red state-blue state coronavirus divide Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (I-Vt.), his lone remaining primary rival, dropped out and endorsed him.

Both Stabenow and Peters cited Biden’s work in the Obama administration to bail out the auto industry, which helped the Wolverine State during the recession.

ADVERTISEMENT

“Joe Biden has always had our backs in Michigan,” said Stabenow. “Time after time, he has been there for us when it really counted. Whether it's standing with our auto industry during the 2009 crisis, protecting our Great Lakes or making sure people have health care, Joe Biden understands our Michigan way of life.”

“I am proud to endorse Joe Biden because he’s always been there for Michigan. From standing with our state in rescuing the auto industry to providing economic stimulus to guide our communities out of the financial crisis — Joe has shown that he'll continue to be a champion for Michigan’s middle class families and workers,” added Peters.

Baldwin touted the importance Wisconsin holds in the 2020 race and said she would do everything she could to help Biden win the key state in November.

“I'm supporting Joe Biden for president not just because he's always fought for the bold, progressive change that working families in Wisconsin need — but because he understands that everyone deserves to be treated with dignity and respect — and afforded the opportunity to thrive,” Baldwin said in a video. “The road to the White House goes right through Wisconsin, and I’m going to do everything I can to make sure Joe Biden wins here in November. And I hope you’ll join me.”

The endorsements from the three senators follow backing for Biden from Democratic heavy hitters like former President Obama and Sens. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) and Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth WarrenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move McConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (D-Mass.).

While unsurprising, the latest endorsements set up crucial establishment support for Biden in two states Democrats are eager to flip after narrowly losing them to President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE in 2016.