In an interview with Hugh Hewitt on Wednesday, Senator Thom Tillis (R-NC) discusses whether Senator Richard Burr (R-NC) should remain as chair of Senate Intel during an ethics investigation into insider trading prior to the coronavirus.



"Would you just pass along to him for me, and I believe every Republican who’s listening, and conservative, he needs to step down as head of Intel," Hewitt said. "I have no confidence in him until this is done. Not the Senate, but I don’t want him chairing Intel in a time when we have to have confidence in the findings of that committee regarding the PRC."



From the interview:





HUGH HEWITT, HOST: Now I’m going to be very hard on the Democrats in this segment, but I want to begin by being hard on the Republicans. Your seatmate, Senator Burr, is under investigation for insider trading and now the sale of his Capitol Hill house. I believe in the Menendez rule. No one has to quit the Senate unless they’re convicted, but I also believe he ought to step down as chairman of the Intel Committee. Has there been any conversation with him about that?



SEN. THOM TILLIS (R-NC): I haven’t had any conversation with him about it. I know that the Ethics Committee, he asked for an investigation by the Senate Ethics Committee. I suspect that there is an investigation in the DOJ, and we’ll have to see where the facts lead.



HEWITT: Would you just pass along to him for me, and I believe every Republican who’s listening, and conservative, he needs to step down as head of Intel. I have no confidence in him until this is done. Not the Senate, but I don’t want him chairing Intel in a time when we have to have confidence in the findings of that committee regarding the PRC.



TILLIS: Well, regardless of what happens with the investigation, I think Senator Burr owes everybody in North Carolina and the United States an explanation, and we’ll see where the investigation goes. With respect to his chairmanship, that’s a decision that he and, that would be better left to him and the leadership.