CLOSE

TUCSON — Migrant aid and advocacy groups that provide essential services to asylum seekers stranded at the U.S.-Mexico border are drastically changing the way they operate as the number of COVID-19 cases climbs in the Southwest and the pandemic has halted all asylum proceedings at the border.

Members living in the U.S. have stopped crossing the border and visiting migrants to avoid the possibility of bringing the illness to these individuals, most of whom are living in vulnerable situations, many groups report. But their work is continuing.

Some organizations, such as the Florence Immigrant and Refugee Rights Project in Arizona, are looking into moving their counseling online. Others like Border Kindness in Mexicali, Mexico, continue working diligently to provide services like meals and medical care, even opening a specialized clinic to treat migrants.

"We believe every point of entry city should have a health and wellness center for migrants," said Kelly Overton, the group's founder. "We just never planned that it would be a treatment center for COVID, which is what it's probably gonna be."

Amidst their efforts, they agree the U.S. government is continuing to endanger the lives of migrants during the new coronavirus pandemic, especially the lives of asylum seekers from Latin America returned to Mexico under the Migrant Protection Protocols.

In March, the Homeland Security and Justice departments announced they would postpone MPP hearings until May 1 to limit the spread of COVID-19, a delay that is likely be extended further.

But U.S. officials still require the thousands of migrants waiting in Mexico to leave their temporary homes or shelters and travel amid the pandemic to designated U.S. border crossings to secure a new court date.

The groups acknowledged there's little likelihood that President Donald Trump's administration will end the program, also known as "Remain in Mexico." Border officials have regularly described it as a "game changer" in managing the flood of asylum seekers, and the U.S. government has fiercely fought in court to uphold the program.

Nonetheless, a collective of 26 border aid organizations is asking the Trump administration to adapt its policies surrounding the Migrant Protection Protocols to the challenges posed by the pandemic, and in turn, help save lives, they said.

"Of course our preference would be for DHS to end the policy and to parole asylum seekers to continue their hearings inside the United States," said Kennji Kizuka, a senior researcher on refugee protection for Human Rights First.

"But failing that, what we've sent out to (Customs and Border Protection) and to the courts are a couple of, we think, very sensible and practical solutions," he said.

The organizations, whose work spans the length of the U.S.-Mexico border, detailed their recommendations in an April 14 letter to the leaders at the Homeland Security and Justice Departments.

The suggestions include:

Eliminating the requirement for migrants to travel to their designated ports of entry to get a rescheduled MPP hearing.

Issuing rescheduling documents at other ports of entry to keep migrants from having to travel large distances.

Instructing government trial attorneys to consent to changes of venue for migrants who had to relocate to other areas of the border.

DHS has not yet responded to the recommendations included in the letter or to requests for comment.

The department also has not announced whether it will postpone additional MPP hearings currently scheduled past May 1.

"The Departments will continually review conditions related to COVID-19 and will make further determinations as necessary in order to ensure that all MPP hearings can proceed as expeditiously as possible when appropriate," DHS said in an earlier statement.

At the same time, U.S. border officials have been turning away all migrants they encounter at the southern border, citing fears of an outbreak of COVID-19 at temporary holding facilities.

"Right now, no one can cross the bridge. Even an unaccompanied minor, if you get to the halfway point, you will be turned around and sent straight back. You're not allowed to be there," said Jennifer Harbury, founder of the Angry Tias and Abuelas of the Rio Grande Valley in south Texas.

"If they catch you having just swam the river, they'll deport you immediately. There's no hearings, no nothing. They expel them. They're using the coronavirus as an excuse for that," she said.

Long trips to reschedule a hearing

Currently, asylum seekers returned to three of the seven Mexican border cities where the Migrant Protection Protocols are in place must travel hundreds of miles to obtain a new date for their rescheduled hearings, placing them at even greater risk of exposure to COVID-19, according to the letter from the migrant aid groups.

Migrants returned to Mexicali, on the California border, must travel 110 miles one way to pick up their rescheduled hearing notice in Tijuana. Individuals sent back to Piedras Negras, on the border with Texas, must travel a similar distance to reach their designated crossing in Nuevo Laredo.

But in Nogales, Sonora, on the border with Arizona, migrants sent back under "Remain in Mexico" like Antonia Castillo face a nine-hour, 370 mile-long trek through disputed cartel territory to reach Ciudad Juárez.

U.S. officials returned Castillo, a 48-year-old migrant from Honduras, and her teenage daughter to Nogales in late January. They've been living in a one-bedroom apartment with two other women from Honduras and their children.

Antonia Castillo, a 48-year-old migrant from Honduras, and her teenage daughter have been living in a one-bedroom apartment in Nogales, Sonora, with two other women from Honduras and their children. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

On April 10, all six took the bus to Juárez for their scheduled MPP hearing in El Paso on April 13. Castillo described the trip as "horrible," not just because of the tenuous security situation they faced, but also because of possible exposure to the coronavirus.

"We all had our hand sanitizer, and we all had face masks," Castillo said.

The three women stayed at a hotel near the Paso del Norte border crossing in downtown Juárez. On April 13, they showed up to the crossing at 4:30 a.m., joining dozens of other asylum seekers with court dates originally scheduled for that morning.

But instead of being allowed into the U.S. and taken to their hearing in El Paso, customs officers gave Castillo a slip of paper with a June 24 court date and turned the three women back to Juárez. The process took no more than 30 minutes, she said.

The women left by bus for Nogales a few hours later, eager to get back to the familiarity they had built over the past three months in that city. But they almost didn't make it.

At an immigration checkpoint near the cartel-disputed Sonora-Chihuahua state line, an officer demanded to see the renewed humanitarian visa Mexican officials issued them in Juárez. Castillo couldn't find hers.

"He ordered us to keep searching and threatened to take all of us away, even though the other women had their permit, only I couldn't find it," she said. "It had gotten lost among the other paperwork. But he still threatened to get us off the bus."

After several minutes searching, she found it, relieved but still shaken up. The women arrived to Nogales by midnight and immediately went to their apartment, where they remain confined out of fear of COVID-19.

Those types of risks, associated with public safety and the pandemic, are exactly what border groups want to avoid, they said.

"We were literally just outraged when this started, that we were having to bus these people from Mexicali," Overton said. "We were having to bus people 250 miles round trip, put them up for the night, etc."

Antonia Castillo was able to make the harrowing journey to her MPP hearing in Ciudad Juarez. She returned to her Nogales, Sonora, apartment afterward and remains confined out of fear of COVID-19. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic)

Border Kindness has helped transport between 1,200 and 1,500 asylum seekers in the past year from Mexicali to Tijuana for their court dates, sometimes transporting the same individual multiple times for multiple hearings over several months.

Now, as a result of the pandemic, the group has devised a new plan, working jointly with legal aid organization Al Otro Lado in the San Diego/Tijuana area, to keep migrants from having to make the trip.

"We're able to pick up those court dates en masse now," Overton said. "So instead of 13 people needing to go, we're able to get those slips for them."

That process is still under revision. Even though the groups are able to secure the reschedule notices for asylum seekers from a distance, that has created a new problem.

Mexican immigration officials typically issue asylum seekers returned under MPP a humanitarian visa on the same day as their court hearing. The visa allows them to live and work legally in Mexico, but it expires on the date of their next hearing.

The migrant aid groups on the California border are trying to figure out a way to keep asylum seekers from traveling to their hearing without losing their chance to renew their Mexican humanitarian visas.

CLOSE Many migrant families travel through Tijuana, across the border from San Diego. Officials are making a heavy push to prepare for the new coronavirus. Arizona Republic

Violence, exploitation constant worries

With asylum processing and hearings for the Migrant Protection Protocols rescheduled until at least May 1, asylum seekers sent back to Mexico face an even lengthier wait in the country, and with no possibility to advance their case.

During that time, they remain easy prey for criminal groups seeking to kidnap or extort them, despite the lockdowns spurred by the coronavirus. Travel restrictions have made tracking those reports of exploitation harder, but they are still happening, according to Kizuka, with Human Rights First.

"We're getting far fewer reports about those kinds of issues," he said. "But we're still getting cases of people who are getting kidnapped, people who are being assaulted in Mexico, along the route to get to the ports of entry, or just after they've been turned back after picking up their hearing notices."

Follow Arizona politics? Our reporters stay on top of it all. Subscribe now to azcentral.com.

Human Rights First has become the repository for information on crimes committed against asylum seekers along the U.S.-Mexico border, especially among individuals sent back under MPP.

As of Feb. 28, Kizuka has documented over a 1,000 cases of "murder, rape, torture, kidnapping, and other violent assaults against asylum seekers and migrants forced to return to Mexico," according to the organization. That includes 228 reports of kidnappings or attempted kidnappings involving children.

Some of the most dangerous areas for violence and extortion targeting asylum seekers is the Texas border with the Mexican state of Tamaulipas. The border cities of Nuevo Laredo, Reynosa and Matamoros account for the majority of reported cases so far this year, according to the list.

"By forcing people to stay on the other side of the bridge, we've basically greatly enriched the gangs, instead of fighting them. That's what our government policy has achieved," said Harbury with Angry Tias and Abuelas of the Rio Grande Valley.

The organization came together in 2018 to assist asylum seekers in Mexico.

Its volunteers also have stopped crossing the border, but the group continues to provide funding and donations for migrants, especially at a closely watched tent city of asylum seekers returned to Matamoros, which advocates fear could become a hot spot for COVID-19 cases.

Harbury said nearly half of the migrants she's encountered in her work have been victims of some type of crime while in Mexico. The group has criticized the Trump administration for continuing to return asylum seekers to Mexico even after they've been victims of crime there.

She cited an example of a migrant woman with whom she's been in close contact. Kidnappers took her and her 3-year-old son to a stash house and told her they would sell their organs if no one paid a ransom. She escaped with her child during a shootout with a rival gang and crossed the Rio Grande to claim asylum.

U.S. officials sent the two to Matamoros under MPP, despite the kidnapping. Once back in Mexico, another group kidnapped them again. This time, a gang member raped her, Harbury said.

Volunteer attorneys attempted to get the mother and son paroled into the U.S. based on their experience, but U.S. officials denied them and sent them back to Matamoros a second time. She's now hiding at a shelter, waiting for her next hearing. But danger is never too far.

"She's seen different gang members that she recognizes from the kidnapping going in and out, disguised as church volunteers, so she's petrified," Harbury said.

"I offered to sponsor her myself. They will not let her in," she added. "I don't understand why she's expected to die in Tamaulipas for having never committed a crime at all, just looking for a safe place for her child. But that's what the United States is doing."

Efforts at legal representation stymied

In the months before coronavirus temporary halted MPP, legal aid groups had complained that the program doesn't allow them to provide proper counsel to asylum seekers, in large part because the migrants are in Mexico and attorneys either are unable to travel or to take on cases from another country.

The decision to postpone hearings has limited them further, according to Nicolas Palazzo, a staff attorney with the Las Americas Immigrant Advocacy Center in El Paso.

Since attorneys have stopped crossing the border, he said his organization has turned to using the social messaging app WhatsApp to communicate with their clients.

Since MPP rolled out in El Paso in March 2019, Palazzo has represented some 100 families and has successfully had about about 70 people taken out of the program and paroled into the U.S.

"Since COVID, we have tried on two different occasions with individuals and we failed," Palazzo said. "We believe that unfortunately DHS and Border Patrol are using COVID as pretext to essentially shut off any means that people can be removed from MPP."

At the Arizona-Mexico border, Alex Miller manages the Florence Project's border action team. The group largely provides legal counsel for migrants in detention centers in Arizona. In Nogales, her team offers consultations and workshops for asylum seekers to help fill out their paperwork.

Normally, her team can count on as many as 25 volunteers to help provide access to counsel to asylum seekers at the border. But the pandemic has eliminated access both to her volunteers and to the migrants, at least for now.

"We're trying to figure out how to move to an entirely remote services model where people can access legal services from where they are staying, be it a shelter or an apartment, or wherever they found accommodations," Miller said.

The Florence Project is still strategizing on how to best do that. In addition to partners on the ground in Nogales, like the migrant aid group Kino Border Initiative, they've also reached out to law school clinics, she added.

But as legal aid groups try to adapt to changing government policies at the border, whether they're related to the COVID-19 pandemic or not, Palazzo said they expect these policies could change at any moment, adding to their frustration.

"They're done in such a haphazard fashion that it leaves advocates and attorneys like me without any clear idea of how to help our clients," he said.

'There is just nowhere for recent arrivals to go'

Concerns over the waning rights of asylum seekers during the pandemic are not limited to migrants returned to Mexico under the Migrant Protection Protocols.

Since March 21, U.S. border officials have been turning back any migrant they encounter at the Southwest border, immediately expelling Mexicans and Central Americans to Mexico and sending everyone else back to their home countries as quickly as possible.

Asylum officers at land ports of entry have also stopped processing thousands of migrants who have been waiting for months to claim asylum in the U.S., despite the chance they could be sent back to Mexico under MPP.

A report on the metering of migrants, compiled by the Strauss Center at the University of Texas at Austin and the Center for U.S.-Mexican Studies at the University of California in San Diego, estimated that as of this month, there were 14,400 migrants stranded at 11 main border cities in Mexico waiting to seek asylum. Nearly two-thirds of them are in Tijuana.

The report found that as a result of the pandemic, all but four of those cities had closed their waitlists to newly arrived migrants. New arrivals will have to wait until the lists reopen to put their names down, but it's unclear how long that will take.

Also, many migrant shelters along the entire border have also closed their doors to newly arrived migrants as a precaution, to shield the individuals they're already housing from exposure to COVID-19.

"There is just nowhere for recent arrivals to go. So that's kind of created a conundrum," said Katie Sharar, the communications director with the Kino Border Initiative in Nogales.

The binational aid group has delayed opening a 130-bed shelter at their new migrant aid center, despite already having the beds and other resources in place to do so, because of the virus. They're also handing out daily more than 200 meals to go rather than serving them at their brand new soup kitchen.

In Tijuana the wait list has topped 9,600 migrants looking to present their claims at the San Diego port of entry, according to the metering report.

An analysis by the Colegio de la Frontera Norte (COLEF), a leading think tank and research university in Tijuana, found that the city's 31 migrant shelters, more than any other border city, have a combined capacity to house 5,100 people.

That's far less than the total number of migrants on the waitlist, and it doesn't take into account individuals that were sent back to the city under MPP, since the program rolled out here in January 2019. Tijuana also remains the busiest point of return for Mexican migrants deported from the U.S.

As part of their analysis, researchers at COLEF recommended "to relocate at least two thirds of the people in each shelter to hotels in the city with the following characteristics: low price per room, rooms with bathrooms, and a collective kitchen," the report said.

They urged the federal government in Mexico to work with private businesses to help pay for this endeavor, and to negotiate room rates with largely empty hotels struggling to attract customers amid the pandemic. But their proposal hasn't garnered any traction so far.

Miller, with the Florence Project, said the U.S. government can also do more to protect migrants from COVID-19, while at the same time safeguarding public health in the U.S.

"We don't think that these are necessarily mutually exclusive," she said. "There are ways to protect people's access to asylum while still protecting public health writ large."

Have any news tips or story ideas about the U.S.-Mexico border? Reach the reporter at rafael.carranza@arizonarepublic.com, or follow him on Twitter at @RafaelCarranza.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/border-issues/2020/04/18/border-aid-groups-demand-changes-remain-mexicopolicy-during-pandemic/2992981001/