NY Post may be compensated and/or receive an affiliate commission if you buy through our links.

Bored during the coronavirus lockdown or looking to take your mind off the coronavirus pandemic? Learn something new.

There’s a plethora of online learning courses and classes on the internet to soak up knowledge in just about anything. Channel your inner student and give your brain some exercise with classes in everything from the arts, to cooking, to web development, or languages.

No matter your budget (some courses are free), you can master a new skill while at home; all it takes is some time and dedication.

Coding

If HTML, JavaScript and JPEG are foreign concepts, then a coding class is the way to get computer literate. This 10-course learning experience can teach you coding basics and so much more with over 120 hours of training. It’s a great starting point for anyone, from those looking for web development basics all the way to pros looking to brush up their skills.

Languages

Whether you’re looking to learn Spanish, French, Chinese or nearly any language, take the opportunity in lockdown to learn to speak and write. Coursera has a beginner Spanish course, a beginner Chinese characters course and classes for nearly every language. It also offers specialized communication lessons, such as “Business English for Non-Native Speakers.”

Instruments

Dream of strumming a guitar or tickling the ivories? The world is your oyster when it comes to learning how to play musical instruments online. Take guitar lessons with the Berklee College of Music or learn to appreciate classical music with a Yale University course. You can even learn how to write your own songs.

MasterClass offers celebrities as teachers, like Carlos Santana, Christina Aguilera, deadmau5, Tom Morello, Herbie Hancock and more.

Take that, Dan Smith.

Dance

Everyone can dance, all it takes is some music — and tunes aren’t even needed for some forms of dance. Whether looking to learn ballet or just how to groove at a party, there’s a dance lesson for you.

American Ballet Theatre’s Misty Copeland teaches ballet class on MasterClass and fellow company dancers Isabella Boylston and James Whiteside are streaming ballet classes weekly on Instagram.

For modern dance lovers, the legendary Alvin Ailey studio also has plenty of online instruction available, and Broadway Dance Center has a large selection of disciplines available, including hip-hop and yoga.

Broadway buffs will love “Fame” star Debbie Allen’s class, which she streams weekly on Instagram, and the Radio City Rockettes, who offer a weekly class for free.

More into aerobic fitness dance? 305 Fitness has a plethora of free classes on YouTube, too.

Food

Get cooking on your culinary skills with the pros, such as Gordon Ramsay, who can teach you how to make restaurant-quality food at home. He’s not the only famous chef who will teach you how to slice and dice. MasterClass offers cooking classes with Dominique Ansel, Gabriela Cámara, Wolfgang Puck and more.

If you’re looking to learn about nutrition and making healthy food choices, Stanford offers an “Introduction to Food and Health” course that is useful for everyday life.

Prospective sommeliers will also love the University of California Davis’ wine tasting class.

Art

From art history to drawing, the internet is exploding with art. Channel your inner van Gogh with a drawing course and learn to sketch with Disney, which has free drawing classes and tutorials for how to re-create famous characters. Illustrator Carson Ellis also has free lessons on Instagram called Quarantine Art Club.

Prefer to study rather than do? Take a virtual museum tour with specialized courses from the Museum of Modern Art. Many more famous museums are offering virtual tours, too.

Fashion

Fashion is so much more than getting dressed. You can learn to appreciate the art of fashion with the Museum of Modern Art, which offers a “Fashion as Design” course.

For budding designers, Marc Jacobs teaches a fashion design class, and Diane von Furstenberg teaches how to build a brand on MasterClass. Learn how to be a boss like Vogue editor Anna Wintour with her “Creativity and Leadership” class.

The French Fashion School IFM (Institut Français de la Mode) also has a free online course called “Understanding Fashion: From Business to Culture.”

Writing

Grab a pen and paper or start typing on a keyboard. Coursera has tons of resources for fine-tuning writing skills, including creative writing, modern poetry and script writing.

You can even get training from some famed favorites including Shonda Rhimes, Aaron Sorkin, Margaret Atwood and Dan Brown.

Photography

Photography is one of the most useful skills to have, especially since most of the world carries a near-professional grade camera in their pockets at all times. Learn to understand photography as an art with an introductory class, or the basic how-to’s for any camera — from smartphones to DSLRs.

For Nikon lovers, the camera brand even has its own tutorials for shutterbugs. Pros and amateurs alike can also learn from one of the greats, Annie Leibovitz.