If your beloved dog got eaten by coyotes while you were on tour, you’d be feeling pretty reckless too. That’s the simplest explanation for this unexpected new Miley Cyrus album, one that arrived last week, following a preview of lead track Dooo It! at Cyrus’s MTV video music awards performance.

Twenty-three tracks long and veering between proto-bangers bearing the imprimatur of hip-hop producer Mike Will Made It (Bang Me Box, Fweaky and Lighter, possibly the most accessible tracks here) and wiggy synth creations belying bongfuls of weed (“I’m sucking on your nipples, licking milky milky stars,” goes a bagatelle called Milky Milky Milk), Miley Cyrus & Her Dead Petz boasts the blessing, but not the involvement, of Cyrus’s record company.

The singer wrote and produced Dead Petz independently, alongside Flaming Lip Wayne Coyne , something of a musical squire to a succession of millennial starlets (well, Kesha). As Cyrus tells it, her defunct dog Floyd’s “energy” went into Coyne’s “energy”. Their relationship is platonic, she stresses. Because otherwise that would be weird.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Miley Cyrus sings Dooo It! from Dead Petz.

Previously, Cyrus has merely been reckless in a manner that befits a youthful mainstream celebrity – twerking, partying, outre Instagramming. Self-recording a sad, sweary (exhibit A: a song called Fuckin’ Fucked Up), stoned album in her home studio with a shaggy 54-year-old psychedelicist presents a rather more intriguing curveball. What is especially surprising is how engaging some of these 23 tracks are, especially if you are one of the few people in the Venn diagram intersection of their two disparate fanbases. Karen Don’t Be Sad is a space-noise-strafed Flaming Lips song sung with mellifluous restraint by an A-list pop star known for her crassness.

The Floyd Song (Sunrise) also follows this template, Cyrus’s faraway vocal wobbling all over a typically tremulous Lipsian confection. “The sunrise insists on gladness/ But how can I be glad when my flower is dead?” Cyrus warbles. Her mourning comes out kitsch and pastelly, which somehow resonates more satisfyingly than an intently strummed guitar ballad, the usual packaging for pop sadness.

Cyrus has more than dead dogs on her mind. Alongside strings and beats, BB Talk boasts lengthy spoken-word revelations. Cyrus dislikes public displays of affection, but she is fond of the smell of her paramour’s armpit.

Mostly, though, these wayward songs are in the vein of Tangerine, a directionless synth doodle that nonetheless shoehorns in a verse from rapper Big Sean. For every 1 Sun – unexpected enviro-pop with a lysergic edge – there are two Miley Tibetan Bowlz, in which Cyrus ululates over the sound of ringing eastern tones. The record company, it’s fair to say, has not missed out on serious cash here. What is most surprising, perhaps, is not that Miley Cyrus has self-released a goofy, addled sonic experiment, but that, in the post-label, internet age, more pop stars in her position haven’t.