Getty

Kohl’s has become the retail poster child of late—the company everyone mentions when they want to talk about a legacy retailer that is successfully adapting to a radically reordered marketplace.

And given all the turmoil in the industry, particularly on the physical store side of the business, Kohl’s indeed does stand out as a retailer that is doing a lot of the right things.

But when pundits and analysts alike make the case that it’s the store’s tie-in with Amazon that’s making all the difference, perhaps they need to take a remedial math class. It turns out the Amazon effect is on a relatively small scale compared to the overall Kohl’s business.

The same goes for some of the other initiatives Kohl’s has been working on, including sublets to Aldi and Planet Fitness.

Consider:

• Yes, Kohl’s is now accepting free returns of merchandise purchased on Amazon. Consumers can bring them back to a Kohl’s store, with a receipt, and get a refund. According to a store employee when asked about the program, if customers don’t have a receipt they get the credit at Kohl’s, not Amazon.

It’s a smart tie-in and obviously drives foot traffic to Kohl’s locations. One published report says the number of people walking into an Amazon-program store averaged 13.5% higher than conventional stores. That’s impressive.

But do the math: Kohl’s has about 1,100 stores but this program is only available in less than 10% of them, or about 100 stores. The program is reportedly only being tested in California and Chicago locations, and there is no timetable from Kohl’s management when it might be expanded to the other more than 1,000 stores.

• Selected Kohl’s stores are also selling Amazon-branded products, notably Alexa voice devices and Kindle readers. Again, these are very popular products and provide Kohl’s stores with a serious merchandising point of differentiation.

But this program is only in about 200 stores, about 17% of the company’s total footprint. That’s good for those stores, but it still means there are more than 900 Kohl’s stores that don’t sell Amazon products.

• People also point to Kohl’s subleasing strategy, another smart move on its part to repurpose space vacated by downsized stores. Macy’s is doing the same thing by moving in Backstage departments into its existing stores while Sears has been leasing out lots of its former selling space in its race to retail irrelevancy.

The Aldi partnership is right, bringing in high frequency shoppers to its real estate, even if the two stores operate independently and aren’t internally connected.

But again, this program is in its infancy. Kohl’s management has talked about testing the concept in five or ten locations and one published report earlier this month said there was only one actual Aldi up and running in former Kohl’s space.

To have any real impact on Kohl’s business there will literally need to be dozens—maybe hundreds—of Aldi subleases in place and that’s nowhere in sight.

• The same for the company’s just announced tie-in with Planet Fitness to open ten gyms this year in Kohl’s space. Again, another traffic driver—and the right traffic, younger shoppers who are hard to get into legacy retailing spaces.

But its impact on the store’s financial performance will be minimal at best at this level. Tests are great yet they don’t really prove their worth until they are ramped up chain-wide and that day is way, way off on all of these things.

Taken all together these are smart moves on the part of Kohl’s management and they are to be applauded. But in attributing the company’s positive numbers to them, well, the fact is that they are collectively just too small to really move the needle.

Michelle Gass, Kohl’s CEO, says all of these things are part of a bigger picture. “The big idea is that this is teaching us to think differently,” she was recently quoted as saying, channeling her inner Steve Jobs perhaps.

Nevertheless the retailer is looking at things in ways its counterparts aren’t. It recently signed a deal with WW, the company previously known as Weight Watchers, for a line of home-related merchandise. Having Oprah Winfrey—a shareholder and the current public face for WW—out there working your brand is not a bad thing.

Kohl’s has also brought in other brands, including Under Armour, to strengthen its product mix, and this has been something it has done consistently throughout its history.

Inside its stores, Kohl’s is doing many other things right. Stores have electronic pricing signs that allow for dynamic price tags, something very few other retailers have been rolling out to any degree. Its stores still retain the core elements that built the brand in the first place—good sightlines with low fixturing, double entries for better parking lot access, centralized check-outs and an overall more shopper-friendly atmosphere compared with its competing stores, be they department store format or discounters.

But then there’s also the elephant in the room: J.C. Penney. As its biggest direct competitor Kohl’s would have the most to gain from any problems at J.C. Penney, and there have been no shortage of them at the troubled retailer. If J.C. Penney has lost 25% of its overall business in the past decade or so, it stands to reason that Kohl’s has picked up more of that than anybody else. This cannot be underestimated in understanding what’s happening at Kohl’s.

Make no mistake: Kohl’s is doing lots of terrific things on both the merchandising and real estate fronts. And it is most certainly the right store in the right market position to take advantage of others’ weaknesses.

But to credit the Amazon tie-in as the catalyst for all of this is to miss the point. All of that Kohl’s Cash is coming from many places, which is exactly what any company should hope for.