A surveillance video that led to New England Patriots owner Robert Kraft’s ensnarement in a prostitution sting at a massage parlor is set to be released to the public, prosecutors said Wednesday in court filings, citing their obligation under Florida’s public records laws. However, a judge later in the day barred the release of any video until a 29 April hearing where he will hear from all parties, the Palm Beach Post reported.

Lawyers for the 77-year-old Kraft had asked judge Leonard Hanser not to make public the video, calling the evidence “basically pornography”. Circuit judge Joseph Marx later ruled the release would be delayed until the hearing at the end of the month.

Media companies including ABC and ESPN have clashed with Kraft’s defenders, saying suppressing the video of Kraft receiving sexual services at the Orchids of Asia Day Spa in Jupiter, Florida, will violate the state’s open record laws.

The Palm Beach county state attorney’s office announced in court documents on Wednesday that it is required under state law to release the video to the public and cannot wait for a judge to decide on the status of the video.

“The State, as the custodian of the records, cannot delay the release of records to allow a person to raise a constitutional challenge to the release of the documents,” the documents read.

Prosecutors added they will “pixelate or blur depictions of obscene or pornographic images before releasing such records to the public, absent a court order”.

The owner of one of the NFL’s most successful franchises and winner of this year’s Super Bowl was one of hundreds of people charged in February after an investigation unveiled widespread trafficking of young women at Florida day spas and massage parlors.

The billionaire businessman has pleaded not guilty to two misdemeanor charges of soliciting sex and requested a jury trial in March.

William Burck, Kraft’s attorney, argued in Palm Beach county court that surveillance footage from the spa should not be released to the media because it would violate Kraft’s privacy rights, compromise his right to a fair trial, and interfere in an active criminal investigation.

Kraft apologized for his actions in a written statement issued last month.

“I am truly sorry,” Kraft said. “I know I have hurt and disappointed my family, my close friends, my co-workers, our fans and many others who rightfully hold me to a higher standard.”