See the list of weapons and small arms from the United States Air Force

More Photo Galleries

Under the radar: U.S. stealth aircraft See the stealth aircraft that revolutionized air combat. Shares

Second best: Greatest actors who've never won an Oscar See the best actors who have never won an Academy Award Shares

Oorah! United States Marine Corps weapons Standard issue weapons given to US Marines Shares

Pro athletes who were war heroes See the professional athletes who became real American heroes for their military service Shares

100-year-old headlines tell of baseball, protest, war 100-year-old headlines tell of baseball, protest, war Shares

Inside Donald Trump's White House A behind the scenes look at the Trump administration Shares

Remembering Phyllis Schlafly Conservative icon Phyllis Schlafly, the leader of the 1970s Stop ERA movement, has died. Shares

Best Shooting Ranges in the United States From long range sharpshooting to 24-hour target practice, here are America’s 10 Best Shooting Ranges. Shares

The 15 best cheerleading squads in the NFL See the NFL’s best-looking cheerleading squads. Shares

Top 10 handguns in the U.S. The most prolific makes of handguns manufactured in the U.S., based on production statistics provided to ATF. Shares

Child stars: Then and now See the Hollywood child stars we adored, all grown up. Shares

Best female athletes in the world — on and off the field Beauty and brawn, see the sexiest women in professional sports. Shares

Famous Playboy front covers - (mostly) safe for work Playboy announced the end of an era - the magazine announced it will no longer feature pictures of nude women. Shares

Crazy Celebrity Tattoos Tattoos are more popular than ever, but don’t let your kids get something like this. Check out the craziest tattoos celebrities have shown off and the ones they came to regret. Shares

Esquire says these are the sexiest women alive, you be the judge See the women who have won the annual honor from Esquire magazine. Shares

Magazines can't agree on the sexiest woman alive; you be the judge See who was awarded the title of ‘Sexiest’ by leading entertainment magazines. Shares

Hollywood's hottest gunslingers See the best gun-wielding movie heroines. Shares

All-time Super Bowl WAGS See the wives and girlfriends of Super Bowl legends. Shares

20 Age-Defying Celebrities Hollywood stars who have aged really well. Shares

Hottest cars at the Geneva Motor Show See the outrageous cars in this year’s auto show in Geneva. Shares