Rep. Bill Pascrell William (Bill) James PascrellNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus Analysis: Some states getting 0K per coronavirus case, New York getting K One year in, Democrats frustrated by fight for Trump tax returns MORE (D-N.J.) called for the House Ethics Committee to investigate his Republican colleague Rep. Matt Gaetz Matthew (Matt) GaetzCheney, Turner request return of donations to Massie's primary opponent after racist tweets surface GOP Rep. Gaetz pays campaign donor for office space despite House rules: report GOP senator: Burr owes everybody an explanation over stock sales MORE (Fla.) for trying to intimidate a witness on Twitter after directing a tweet at Michael Cohen on the eve of his public testimony.

“One of my colleagues, a duly elected member of Congress, has taken to twitter to intimidate a witness. This is grossly unethical and probably illegal (18 USC § 1512(b))," Pascrell wrote, citing the U.S. code on witness tampering.

“House Ethics must investigate this disgrace and stain on our institution,” Pascrell added.

One of my colleagues, a duly elected member of Congress, has taken to twitter to intimidate a witness. This is grossly unethical and probably illegal (18 USC § 1512(b)).



House Ethics must investigate this disgrace and stain on our institution. https://t.co/MLEsqkarfC — Bill Pascrell, Jr. (@BillPascrell) February 26, 2019

Pascrell’s criticism comes after Gaetz, one of the president’s most loyal supporters in Congress, tweeted at Cohen accusing him of having affairs.

ADVERTISEMENT

“Hey @MichaelCohen212 - Do your wife & father-in-law know about your girlfriends?” Gaetz tweeted. “Maybe tonight would be a good time for that chat. I wonder if she’ll remain faithful when you’re in prison. She’s about to learn a lot...”

Hey @MichaelCohen212 - Do your wife & father-in-law know about your girlfriends? Maybe tonight would be a good time for that chat. I wonder if she’ll remain faithful when you’re in prison. She’s about to learn a lot... — Matt Gaetz (@mattgaetz) February 26, 2019

Cohen on Tuesday spoke privately with the Senate Intelligence Committee ahead of his public testimony on Wednesday.

The president’s former attorney and "fixer" will reportedly testify that President Trump Donald John TrumpWuhan lab denies claims of coronavirus origination Banks say they ran out of PPP funding 'within minutes' Trump defends testing capabilities, blasts critics during WH briefing MORE has a history of making racist comments and inflating or delating his net worth for business purposes such as avoiding taxes.

His testimony comes before he is set to serve three years in prison after he pleaded guilty to campaign finance law violations, bank fraud, tax fraud and lying to Congress about the timing of negotiations for a Trump Tower in Moscow.

Gaetz insisted that he was not engaging in witness intimidation, telling the Daily Beast that he was "challenging the veracity and character of a witness.”

“This is what it looks like to compete in the marketplace of ideas,” the Florida Republican said.

Gaetz did not say whether or not he had evidence for his claims about Cohen.

He told the outlet that him questioning Cohen’s marriage was a fair topic ahead of his time in prison.

“If you think I have the power to determined when people leave their spouses you attribute far too much credit to me,” he told the reporter. “I just merely pondered the question, Sam.”

The Hill has reached out to Gaetz's office for further comment.