Chefs and restaurant owners across the country have voiced their frustration this week about the makeup of an economic council assembled by the White House to address the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on businesses. A recent announcement by Yountville chef Thomas Keller that he was “proud” to be part of the group spurred outcry on social media, which led the chef to hit back at his “haters” online.

It started Tuesday, when the White House announced the specific makeup of a council of CEOs, association representatives and others who would advise the government on the steps needed to revitalize the U.S. economy in the wake of the novel coronavirus pandemic. Among them is a roster of food and beverage specialists, mainly chain restaurant CEOs and heads of national manufacturing corporations like Coca Cola and Kraft, with the notable exception of four chef/restaurateurs known for their work in fine dining: Wolfgang Puck, Jean-Georges Vongerichten, Daniel Boulud and Keller.

Members of the food industry, like the those affiliated with the Bay Area Hospitality Coalition (BAHC), a restaurant advocacy organization that emerged during the coronavirus outbreak, expressed disappointment that small, independent businesses were left out, as they are still struggling with garnering representation on the federal level.

Informing that discontent is a sense of existential urgency: As the economic impact of the coronavirus outbreak continues, food and beverage businesses have been among the hardest hit, plagued by mass layoffs and closures.

So when Keller said that he was “honored” to be tapped for the White House council on Twitter, he was immediately hit with blowback. Critics pointed out the overwhelming whiteness and maleness of the 23-person food and beverage group and were skeptical of such a group’s ability to speak to the concerns of food workers at large.

“The lack of women is really painful,” wrote Kat Kinsman, a senior editor at Food & Wine magazine, on Twitter. “I'm sure the dudes are great, but I'm so, so tired of just having to trust that they'll do the right thing rather than folks having a seat at the table, too. It feels like, ‘Let daddy take care of it,’ and that's beyond disheartening.”

Edward Lee, a Washington D.C. chef and writer, had a slightly different take on it in a Twitter post. “Its (sic) a bad look but we have an opportunity (to) be unified in this fight. I will trust in (Keller) to fight for policy we ALL need.”

Lee called on the government to improve the Paycheck Protection Program, a small business loan program which ran out of funds just days after applications opened; provide better protection for frontline food workers; compel business insurance companies to pay out for losses related to coronavirus; and to offer grants instead of loans with conditional forgivability.

In response to the backlash, Keller, who normally isn’t known for engaging in online back-and-forth, spoke up on Twitter. “This is not a partisan issue; millions are struggling to put a meal on their table. I stand proudly alongside some of the great thought-leaders of today; Tim Cook, Jeff Bezos, Ajay Banga, Condoleezza Rice, Adam Silver, Ann Mukherjee, Barbara Grimm, and many others. I urge all haters and cynics to stop and join meaningful actions. Shout less, act more.”

Los Angeles chef and restaurateur Carlos Salgado responded, “Shame on you for pridefully aligning with terrorists without protest and without publicly advocating for the most disenfranchised in our industry. You were our hero. Now you look ugly—We expected more from you, jefe. (That means “chef” in Spanish, FYI.)”

Soleil Ho is The San Francisco Chronicle’s restaurant critic. Email: soleil@sfchronicle.com