(Granta £9.99) The surprise Orange prizewinner (whose author was accused of and denied plagiarising AJ Sherman’s Mandate Days: British Lives in Palestine 1914-48). Condensed in the style of the original

Listen. Times were very hard if you were a poor, politically correct Jewish girl living in the east end of London during the Blitz and you were trying to eke out a living as a hairdresser. They were even harder if you never knew your Dad and your mother had just died. So, in 1946, I lied my way on to a boat sailing for Palestine. I joined a kibbutz on my arrival. I loved the long, exegetical discussions we all had about the history of kibbutz life but it was hard work having sex with some of the men.

I wanted to be a new Jew, not some Russian emigre from a collective farm, so I hitched a lift with Levi, or Johnny, as he sometimes called himself, a man with impeccable Jewish credentials, and headed off for Tel Aviv.

I moved into a block of flats and met some locals who gave me history lessons on the differences between the Oestjuden and the German experience. My neighbour, Mrs Kulp, conveniently happened to be a hairdresser and after testing me on the history of hairdressing, she hired me to work in her salon where my British clients mourned the passing of Empire and offered their historical perspective on Palestine.

Johnny reappeared after a spate of kidnappings and, after a long discussion on the history of the Jewish resistance, we had sex, and thereafter he pressed me for information on my clients. We still had time for fun, though, because we also discussed the historical significance of Jewish haircuts. Mrs Linz told me later that Johnny was an Irgun terrorist, but I didn’t get time to confront him before a hotel was blown up and he went into hiding. He reappeared later, and after another historical dialogue on factionalism, he said the police were on to me and that I should also go into hiding.

Shortly afterwards, I discovered I was pregnant and that Johnny had been arrested. How I missed our history lessons.

The British eventually caught up with me and put me on a boat to France. I met my husband, Leo, in a cemetery there and six years later my son (with Johnny) died by swallowing a balloon. Johnny went on to become an air steward with El Al, but I didn’t go back to Israel for many years. Tel Aviv had changed a lot.

And if you really are pressed: The digested read, digested...

File under non-fiction for a historical analysis of the creation of the State of Israel that manages to end before the British withdrawal from Palestine.