Shannon Donnelly

Palm Beach Daily News

PALM BEACH, Fla. – As the coronavirus pandemic strangles the state’s hospitality industry, even the Guy in Charge is feeling the squeeze.

Two of the Trump Organization’s properties in South Florida — the Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach and Trump Doral in Miami — have furloughed all “non-essential” staff, a total of 713 people.

At President Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago Club, 153 people will be furloughed, according to a WARN (Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification) letter sent to Florida’s Department of Economic Opportunity by Janine Gill, director of human resources at the Mar-a-Lago Club, and copied to Palm Beach Mayor Gail Coniglio.

In the letter, dated March 27, Gill wrote the club began halting its operations “due to the unforeseen business circumstances caused by the natural disaster and spread of the novel coronavirus, the mandated closures under Palm Beach County’s Declaration of Emergency, as well as recommendations regarding public gatherings ... the club has been forced to place its non-essential personnel on temporary furlough status.”

The furloughed workers include both indoor and outdoor staff, and range from dishwashers to tennis pros to executive assistants.

At Trump National Doral in Miami-Dade, 560 workers were furloughed.

Both furloughs are said to be temporary, although when workers will be called back remains unknown.

The coronavirus pandemic has crippled the tourist-oriented Florida economy, forcing the closure closure of hotels, restaurants, nightclubs and recreational facilities just before the lucrative spring vacation season.

Mar-a-Lago Club first notified members of a partial closure on March 19, in response to health concerns related to the coronavirus outbreak, that would affect its restaurant and spa and cancel aerobics classes.

A notice sent to members and obtained by the Palm Beach Daily News said the club would cease offering a la carte dining for breakfast, lunch and dinner in the main “house.”

The letter also said that guest rooms will no longer be available for reservations and that the gym would close and spa services and aerobics classes.

By the following day, March 20, the club sent a communique sent to members that “We are writing to inform you that due to Governor DeSantis’ recent executive orders, we unfortunately must suspend all Beach Club and tennis operations.”

The Mar-a-Lago Club customarily closes its doors on Easter Monday, although it has opened for Mother’s Day brunch in past years.

Its Beach Club remained open through the summer, offering its members and guests casual food, beverages, and both ocean and pool swimming.

Follow Shannon Donnelly on Twitter: @pbdnsociety