A summary of the major developments in the coronavirus outbreak across Australia

Here is our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. The main stories on Tuesday 31 March are:

Strict new ‘stay at home’ rules come in

State and territory governments around the country have implemented new rules designed to get people to stay home to slow the spread of coronavirus.

The harshest penalties and strongest restrictions are in NSW and Victoria, which have both recorded the most cases.

In NSW and Victoria, people who leave their home for reasons not on the exception list, including for exercise, shopping at places still allowed, work, or medical needs, they could face fines of up to $11,000 in NSW and $1,600 in Victoria.

Hundreds of thousands apply for jobkeeper payments

More than 230,000 Australian businesses and sole traders have applied for the government’s jobkeeper program in just the one day since it was first announced.

From 1 May, those who meet the criteria will get $1,500 a fortnight for each employee backdated to 30 March. The payment covers all Australian employees, and New Zealanders on 444 visas who have been stood down since 1 March.

Case numbers

There are now 4,557 cases of coronavirus in Australia, an increase of 312 on the previous day. Tasmania recorded its second death after a man died in a Hobart hospital. Tasmanian health authorities revealed both fatalities in the state so far had been passengers on the Ruby Princess; the ACT said its first fatality, reported yesterday, had also been on the ship.

A total of 50 people are in intensive care units, and 20 people are on ventilators.

There are beginning signs of possible community transmission in Bondi, and a mobile testing unit may be set up.

Private hospitals get funding to help response

In a package worth $1.3bn, the federal government will pay private hospitals to help out with the demand faced by the public system as a result of coronavirus. Private hospitals would support the Covid-19 response through activities such as providing care for public patients, carrying out category 1 elective surgery, and providing wards and theatres to expand ICU capacity.

Virgin, Qantas seek billion-dollar bailout

Virgin Australia has asked the federal government for a $1.4bn loan from the government to stay afloat. Qantas reportedly says if Virgin gets the money, it should get a $4.2bn loan.

Australians more anxious about coronavirus threat

The latest Guardian Essential poll shows Australians’ concern about the threat of coronavirus is at 53%, up 14% from last week. At the same time, the number of people who said there had been an overreaction to it went down from 33% to 18%.

Qantas baggage handlers test positive

Six baggage handlers at Adelaide airport have tested positive for Covid-19. SA Health is telling people who arrived there in the past 48 hours to wipe down their bags. About 100 staff will need to self-isolate.

Western Australia emergency laws

The WA government has introduced laws that mean anyone who refuses to comply with self-isolation directions could be forced to wear an electronic device or have one installed in their home.

What you need to know: get the most important information from some of our key explainers

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian’s global network.