BART is 'preparing' their workforce to start service to San Jose in June

A Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) passenger wears a protective mask while riding on a train on April 08, 2020 in San Francisco, California. BART announced that it is slashing daily service as ridership falls dramatically due to the coronavirus shelter in place order. Starting Wednesday, regular Monday through Friday service will be reduced to running trains every half hour between 5 am and 9 pm. less A Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) passenger wears a protective mask while riding on a train on April 08, 2020 in San Francisco, California. BART announced that it is slashing daily service as ridership falls ... more Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Image 1 of / 6 Caption Close BART is 'preparing' their workforce to start service to San Jose in June 1 / 6 Back to Gallery

At a BART Board of Directors meeting Thursday, staff designated June as their latest projected starting date for service to the long-awaited Berryessa and Milpitas stations.

"It depends on a number of factors as outlined in the presentation," BART chief communications officer Alicia Trost told SFGATE, referring to a presentation given during the board meeting. "But we are preparing our workforce for a potential June opening."

The highest risk factor for a June start, according to a PowerPoint slideshow accompanying the presentation, is securing a safety certification from the California Public Utilities Commission. Other factors include concluding testing on their Railroad Intrusion Detection System, an innovative safety feature, and resolving "revenue-required discrepancies."

BAY AREA: 'San Francisco is particularly vulnerable': Expert explains how COVID-19 may hurt city budgets

The saga of BART and VTA's Phase I of the Silicon Valley extension stretches back for years, when it was originally announced that service could be expected as soon as 2016. That date was pushed back a number of times; most recently, staff for BART and VTA said to expect service starting in April, at the very earliest.

In addition to an update on the status of the two new South Bay stations, BART staff issued their latest projections for revenue shortfalls for the upcoming fiscal year. Their estimates ranged from an optimistic $258 million deficit to a $452 million deficit in a worst-case scenario.

These figures, however, do not factor any of the expected assistance from the federal government's bailout of public transit agencies, which was approved in March. The exact size of BART's share of those federal funds has not yet been determined.

Michael Rosen is an SFGATE digital editor. Email: michael.rosen@sfgate.com.