After nearly 10 years weathering the ups and downs of the private aviation market and carving out a healthy business as the lowest price point on the market, executives at the California-based JetSuite Inc. decided it was time for a reboot.

Backed by recent investment from the likes of JetBlue and Qatar Airways, the company aimed to take the JetSuite brand and its full range of private jet offerings to an even more upscale audience.

Its corporate sibling, semi-private operator JetSuiteX, was also poised for growth, with plans to attack the short-haul market in style with a fleet of retrofitted 30-seat aircraft with fares priced competitively to commercial airlines like American or Southwest.

So when the company's CEO Alex Wilcox began looking for a place for the JetSuite team to oversee this next phase of what he calls a "massive growth campaign," a clear answer emerged.

JetSuite CEO Alex Wilcox (left) and President Stephanie Chung pose for a photograph together Friday, Sept. 14, 2018 in Dallas. (Ryan Michalesko/The Dallas Morning News) (Ryan Michalesko / Staff Photographer)

"We decided to move to what I see as the Silicon Valley of aviation," said Wilcox, who along with the rest of JetSuite's corporate staff relocated to Dallas from Irvine, Calif., over the summer. "You've got the world's two biggest airlines here. You've got the remnants of FlexJet here. You've got massive supply chain industry. You've got Sabre."

JetSuite arrives in North Texas as one of the most high-profile additions to the region's aviation economy in years, a well-capitalized veteran of the competitive and fractured private aviation landscape.

The privately held company has nearly 70 employees now based in Dallas, and about 400 total, including flight crews and maintenance staff, across the country in places like Southern California and Austin. It did not disclose other financial details.

JetSuite’s vision is one of a world where travelers have a meaningful alternative to the status quo, whether it is flying privately or purchasing a more affordable fare through JetSuiteX.

"Our goal is to really change the marketplace," said the company’s recently hired president, Stephanie Chung. "You don't have to deal with that. You don't have to settle."

A decade of experience

JetSuite got its start in 2008, when Wilcox, who had previously helped found JetBlue, was hired to write and later execute a business plan for the owner of a small fleet of four-seat Embraer Phenom 100 jets.

The private jet industry is made up of a variety of ownership models and price points, from owning an entire aircraft to owning a piece, or fractional share, of an aircraft, to pre-paying for a certain number of flight hours on a chartered jet. There are also different sizes of aircraft, which increase in cost and luxury.

With a keen focus on operating costs, JetSuite set out to use its new, more fuel-efficient aircraft to offer the lowest price point on the charter market.

"They definitely had a different take on it. [JetSuite] came in with their colorful red jets. ... They wanted to give more of a relaxed feel to what they're providing," said Doug Gollan, a private aviation expert and editor of the website Private Jet Card Comparisons. "Against quality operators, they're very rate competitive. Their focus whenever I talk to them has always been less about the sizzle and more about the steak. Flying you on-time from Point A to Point B on a nice jet with WiFi."

Despite managing to establish itself at a tumultuous time in the industry, Wilcox said the company struggled to escape the "contagion" of the recession's aftermath and struggled to increase its fleet size, a situation made worse by an ill-fated foray into flying larger jets up and down the East Coast.

In 2016, the company launched JetSuiteX, an entirely new product that took converted Embraer ERJ 135 jets, similar to the smaller regional jets operated by airlines, and began attacking a segment of the air travel market he saw as ripe for disruption — short-haul routes of less than 500 miles between major population centers, where traffic has dropped significantly over the last two decades even as overall passenger levels rise.

That translates to 3 million fewer passengers per year flying between Southern California and the Bay Area today than in 2000, Wilcox said, a phenomenon that’s played out in markets across the country, including in Texas on routes from Dallas to Houston, Dallas to Austin and more.

"We saw this massive gap. ... Our hypothesis is that it takes too long to get through the airport. You don't want to spend an hour at the airport to fly 40 minutes," he said.

Today, JetSuiteX operates a limited network of scheduled flights between Southern California, Northern California and Las Vegas, with one-way fares available to the public with prices advertised as low as $79. Typically, fares are about $60 higher one-way than their commercial counterparts, according to the company, and include bags, WiFi, a seat assignment and complimentary alcoholic drinks.

Most importantly, passengers can skip the hassle of major airports and the long security lines in favor of showing up at smaller private aviation terminals and walking on the plane within minutes.

"For us, it's still an airline-like experience in terms of the airplane. There's a flight attendant," Wilcox said. "But it's not insult after insult."

Texas-sized ambition

While the Texas stalwarts of low cost of living, business-friendly environment and central geography played their typical role in helping lure JetSuite to the region, Wilcox said it was the "latent" aviation talent in the region that set D-FW apart from others.

That talent includes Stephanie Chung, a Dallas resident with decades of experience in the private and commercial aviation scenes at companies like USAirways and Flexjet, who joined as president last month to spearhead the revamping of the JetSuite private jet business.

In a recent interview at the company's new headquarters off Mockingbird Lane less than 3 miles from Love Field, Wilcox and Chung bristle with big plans for the company that aren't quite ready to be made public.

Banks of empty cubicles adorned with job titles for future employees speak to the company's aspirations.

With the recent investments, capital isn't a constraint, Wilcox said, with hundreds of potential markets for JetSuiteX and global ambitions for JetSuite.

The only question is how fast to grow, a proposition that has tripped up countless airlines through the decades.

"We're going to grow only as fast as we can and maintain a quality product," he said. "We're opportunistic. We don't want to overcomplicate it."

Elevating the experience

With JetSuiteX launched on a growth trajectory, Wilcox said the company felt the JetSuite side of the business, which handles private jets, was stagnating. The company was faced with the challenge of building a team that could support and grow two diverging business models under the same corporate roof, which is where Dallas comes in.

"[Southern California] is a beautiful area. We all want to go on vacation there. But at the end of the day, when you think about talent for aviation, it doesn't compare to here in the Dallas-Fort Worth area," said Chung, the JetSuite president. "What that means on both commercial and private aviation side is you have the experience you can pull from. Now's the time to pull in people who have been there and done that."

Since being hired last month after years of consulting with JetSuite, Chung has set about putting in place a culture focused on customer service to achieve a more luxurious feel and hopefully attract more — and more lucrative — customers.

She envisions the company being a one-stop shop to meet customers' travel needs from when they leave home until they've returned, whether they own their own private plane or prefer to pay to use one of JetSuite's.

"It's really about taking the product and elevating the experience. ... We don't just want to be their transportation company," she said.

JetSuiteX is also poised to continue its expansion, with plans to add more planes to its current fleet of nine jets. Wilcox couldn’t say when JetSuiteX might arrive in Texas, but said it will happen eventually.

“Right now our model is to slowly march eastward from California,” he said.

Ultimately, JetSuite and JetSuiteX will chart their own paths in what are two very different marketplaces. But Wilcox and Chung think a shared focus on being a simple to use, reliable option for customers will propel both business, and — if they're successful — make flying a more enjoyable, less stressful experience.

“We’re not going to be something for everybody," Chung said. "But for those people who are simply exhausted with the options they have right now, we want to be able to be there for them."