CLOSE

Some meatpacking plants across the U.S. are starting to close indefinitely as hundreds of employees test positive for COVID-19. JBS Tolleson, a large plant southwest of Phoenix, has no plans to shutter.

But the company on Monday announced that two other JBS sites, in Colorado and Pennsylvania, will close indefinitely as numerous employees tested positive for the novel coronavirus.

The Tolleson plant, which in 2018 recalled a massive 12 million pounds of beef, is taking extra steps to ensure employees are safe, JBS USA spokesman Cameron Bruett said. The plant employs about 1,150 people, according to the city of Tolleson.

The measures range from checking employee temperatures before entering the facility to increasing social distancing in the plant.

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coronavirus coverage relating to public safety free of charge. Support The Republic by subscribing to azcentral.com.

Hundreds of employees in U.S. test positive for new coronavirus

A South Dakota meatpacking plant made national headlines Sunday as health officials announced 238 of its employees tested positive for COVID-19. The Smithfield Foods' plant is one of nation's largest pork-processing plants. The county as a whole had 438 cases.

JBS USA's announcement that it would close two plants indefinitely came after Colorado's governor on Friday ordered the company's plant in Greeley to close through Wednesday. Dozens of employees there tested positive for the new coronavirus and at least two died.

The company's plant in Souderton, Pennsylvania also is closed indefinitely. There, 130 of the plant's 900 employees have tested positive for the new coronavirus and a 70-year-old union steward died from respiratory failure caused by the virus, the Philadelphia Inquirer reported.

JBS is the majority owner of the Pilgrim's Pride line, which in 2018 recalled more than 101,000 pounds of breaded chicken due to possible foreign-matter contamination.

Federal investigators with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Food Safety and Inspection Service in 2017 found the Tolleson plant had "egregious" and "inhumane" livestock conditions.

Contracting coronavirus from eating meat not likely, expert says

Bill Marler, a Seattle-based food safety attorney, said the risk of contracting the new coronavirus by eating meat from one of these plants is likely low.

"If somebody sneezed on your steak and you picked the raw steak up and then stuck your fingers in your eyes or your nose, is it theoretically possible you could infect yourself with COVID? I think theoretically (yes)," Marler said. "(But) since meat is cooked, the likelihood of getting this transmitted to humans seems very low."

The bigger risk is disrupting the food supply chain as massive packing and processing plants shutter for the time being, he said. Grocery stores may have a difficult time getting meat into shopping carts simply because of the optics.

"Even if it’s a super low, if not infinitesimal risk, if you’ve got 200 employees that tested positive at one facility, do you think consumers are going to buy pork from that facility?" Marler said.

Safety measures in place in Arizona plant

Among the employee safety measures put in place at the Tolleson meatpacking plant are:

Daily deep-cleaning of the entire facility, including dedicating staff to continuous cleaning.

Increasing social distancing by staggering employee shifts and breaks.

Increasing space in cafeterias, break rooms and locker rooms and installing plexiglass barriers in some areas.

Requiring that extra personal protective equipment be worn at all times.

Taking the temperature of each employee who enters the building.

Requiring sick employees to stay home and relaxing attendance policies so people don't come to work sick.

Removing employees who are in vulnerable populations and still giving them full pay and benefits.

Waiving short-term disability waiting periods.

Providing preventative care to all employees.

Offering free virtual doctor visits through Live Health Online services.

Reach reporter Joshua Bowling at jbowling@azcentral.com or 602-444-8138. Follow him on Twitter @MrJoshuaBowling.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-health/2020/04/13/metro-phoenix-meat-plant-stays-open-others-close-due-covid-19/2985799001/