Our current president has no ability to unite the country, which is one of the most important roles as president. After two mass shooting over the weekend, Trump is only causing more stress and pain on the country. This makes us miss Obama even more.

READ MORE: This Colin Kaepernick Retweet Says Everything You Need To Know About The NFL Players’ Anthem Grievance

People have been so disgusted with Trump not acknowledging white supremacy or how his words have created danger, many have asked him not to go to Dayton, Ohio and El Paso, Texas.

Pastor Michael Grady, the father of a woman who survived the El Paso shooting said on SiriusXM, “I really believe that he should not come. What’s he going to say? I watched the newscast the other day. He read off of a teleprompter. He had no passion about what he was saying. Someone else wrote the speech. So what is he going to do? Come shake some hands, do some photo opportunities and go right back to Washington, D.C. with the same kind of rhetoric, the same kind of venomous hatred that comes out of his mouth? I would hope that he would not come to this city because part of the reason that this city is in the situation it is, is that because words matter. He has spoken devastating words about the border situation, placing people in cages and building a wall.”

He also added, “What would they say, and what could he possibly say? … It’s time to make a decision, to take responsibility. Yes, we can call it a mental issue cause it is a mind issue. But minds are motivated by what they hear.”

While on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” earlier this week, Rep. Veronica Escobar, D-Texas said, “Words have consequences. The president has made my community and my people the enemy. He has told the country that we are people to be feared, people to be hated. I hope that [Trump] has the self-awareness to understand that we are in pain, and we are mourning, and we are doing the very best in our typical, graceful, El Paso way to be resilient. And so I would ask his staff and his team to consider the fact that his words and his actions have played a role in this.”

She also added that her community has “been dehumanized by the president and his enablers” and that this was “one of the lowest points in American history.”

Watch below:

"Words have consequences. The president has made my community and my people the enemy. He has told the country that we are people to be feared, people to be hated." —@RepEscobar pic.twitter.com/QH0rEPIeGc — Morning Joe (@Morning_Joe) August 5, 2019

Here is how our forever president addressed mass shootings.