Good evening, and welcome to our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Naaman Zhou bringing you the main stories on Wednesday 15 April.

No new cases in SA

Anybody in South Australia who has “just got mild symptoms” will be able to be tested for Covid-19, according to the state’s chief public health officer, Dr Nicola Spurrier. And the state recorded no new cases of the virus. In Queensland, cases rose by only five – the lowest number since the beginning of March – according to the state’s health minister, Steven Miles.

Death toll rises to 63

Tasmania recorded its sixth death from Covid-19 and the Australian Capital Territory recorded its third death from the virus. In Tasmania, a 91-year-old woman died at the Mersey hospital in Devonport. In Canberra, a woman in her 60s died in Canberra hospital. She acquired Covid-19 from the Ruby Princess cruise ship, ACT Health said.

Tracking app to be reviewed for privacy issues

A mobile coronavirus tracking app will be reviewed for privacy issues before it is released, the attorney general confirmed to Guardian Australia. The app, announced on Tuesday night, will use Bluetooth to record who has been near a person who has contracted Covid-19. On Wednesday, Christian Porter said the app would be checked for privacy issues, which could delay its intended rollout in 14 days.

Victorian students told to stay home

Victoria’s chief health officer, Brett Sutton, has advised the state government to continue remote learning for term two. “Having a million children and their parents in closer contact with each other, teachers and other support staff has the potential to increase cases of coronavirus,” he said.

Media package announced

A swathe of measures were announced to save Australia’s television, radio and newspapers. The Australian content quotas for drama, children’s shows and documentaries will be suspended for this year, and $13.4m of new money will be invested in regional journalism.

Australia won’t pull WHO funding

The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, has ruled out following Donald Trump’s lead and cutting Australia’s funding to the World Health Organization. “In terms of Australia, we see the World Health Organization playing an important role, particularly in our region, and that’s important to Australia,” he said.

Minister intervenes to keep mobility allowance

The social services minister, Anne Ruston, has intervened to ensure that people with disabilities will keep the mobility allowance during Covid-19 enforced shutdowns. After Guardian Australia reported that 15,000 people could lose the $100-a-fortnight allowance, Ruston said on Tuesday night the department would cease eligibility reviews for the allowance.

Children are 2% of coronavirus cases

The deputy chief medical officer, Nick Coatworth, said that children are only 2% of confirmed Covid-19 cases in Australia, and thus there is a “lower propensity or likelihood of children to get infected”.

NSW police aim for Ruby Princess to leave by Sunday

The NSW police commissioner, Mick Fuller, told reporters that police were “working towards” a “hopeful departure date” of Sunday for the virus-hit cruise ship, which is currently docked in Port Kembla.

Quick guide How to get the latest coronavirus news from Guardian Australia Show Hide Email: sign up for our daily coronavirus newsletter App: download it and never miss the biggest stories Social: follow us on Facebook, Instagram or Twitter Podcast: listen to our daily episodes on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or search "Full Story" in your favourite app

Liberal MPs hit back at lockdown lift

The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, and MP Tim Wilson have rejected calls for social restrictions to be lifted for younger Australians. Frydenberg said that “we need to value every Australian life equally”. “We need to move away from this mindset of thinking that the coronavirus is an older person’s virus,” he said. “It’s a virus that affects all of us.” Wilson said he did not want to see lockdowns eased. “I think it’s easy to make comment from the sidelines … We also have to consider the full scale of what happens if we repeal them, if we get a second wave, then we’re forced back into the same situation again.”

Western Sydney aged care cluster

A cluster of 10 cases at a western Sydney aged care facility has been confirmed, after a staff member worked for six days while symptomatic. The chief medical officer, Dr Kerry Chant, said six staff and four residents tested positive at Anglicare Newmarch House.

Melbourne Writers Festival to go online

The Melbourne Writers Festival will be held completely online, according to organisers. The festival was scheduled to start on 7 August, and patrons will have their tickets refunded.

What you need to know: get the most important information from some of our key explainers

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian’s global network.