Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellSenate battle hinges on four races Pelosi appoints Rep. Donna Shalala to coronavirus oversight panel McConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package MORE (R-Ky.) says he has yet to determine whether President Trump Donald John TrumpWuhan lab denies claims of coronavirus origination Banks say they ran out of PPP funding 'within minutes' Trump defends testing capabilities, blasts critics during WH briefing MORE’s emergency declaration to build border barriers is legal.

Asked for his legal opinion after meeting with a Department of Justice lawyer at a Tuesday luncheon of the GOP conference, McConnell said, “I haven’t reached a total conclusion.”

ADVERTISEMENT

McConnell said while he graduated from law school, he’s not an expert on constitutional questions of separations of power.

“I wouldn’t go, to me, for a simple will,” he said, while noting, “I did go to law school.”

“We had real serious lawyers in there discussing that very issue,” he said, summarizing the lunchtime discussion with Vice President Pence and the senior lawyer from Justice.

“We had a very fulsome discussion of this issue in the conference at noon today with the vice president,” McConnell added.

He described his GOP colleagues as “extremely interested” in the topic.

“We really do think there’s a crisis at the border,” he added.

Three Republican senators — Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsSenate battle hinges on four races The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Democratic challenger outraises Collins in Maine Senate race MORE (Maine), Lisa Murkowski Lisa Ann MurkowskiOvernight Energy: EPA weakens power plant pollution rule | DOJ lets companies skip paying penalties during pandemic | Trump eyes plan to pay companies to keep crude in the ground Trump administration eyes paying oil companies to keep crude in the ground: reports Overnight Energy: Democrats say stimulus should not bail out fossil fuel industry | Court rules for scientists barred from EPA boards | New setback for Keystone XL pipeline MORE (Alaska) and Thom Tillis Thomas (Thom) Roland TillisSenate battle hinges on four races Senate misses deadline, but talks on loans go on The Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 MORE (N.C.) — say they will support a Democratic-sponsored resolution of disapproval on the emergency declaration.

McConnell said it will come up for a vote on the Senate floor before the recess scheduled for mid-March.