Sign up for our special edition newsletter to get a daily update on the coronavirus pandemic.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell says he won’t quickly pass a “phase four” coronavirus bill, citing his concern about the cost of another massive spending package.

McConnell tamped down anticipation after President Trump and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) agreed this week they’d like massive infrastructure spending in a new bill. Trump is pushing for a $2 trillion package.

“We do have to be mindful of how to pay for it,” the Kentucky Republican told the Washington Post. “There has been a lot of fantasizing on both sides about massive packages.”

McConnell called Pelosi’s push for a fourth bill “premature,” saying: “She needs to stand down on the notion that we’re going to go along with taking advantage of the crisis to do things that are unrelated to the crisis.”

Senate Republicans led by McConnell blamed Pelosi last week for upsetting an initial compromise on the approximately $2 trillion “phase three” coronavirus bill, saying a rival 1,400-page bill unfurled by the speaker contained environmental and other measures unrelated to the virus. They said that package included elements of Democrats’ Green New Deal that would not pass on their own.

Pelosi insisted Tuesday that a fourth bill would be “specific to the coronavirus challenge” and “recovery” from it, and that she saw infrastructure as common ground. The president agreed, tweeting, “It should be VERY BIG & BOLD, Two Trillion Dollars, and be focused solely on jobs and rebuilding the once great infrastructure of our Country!”

But McConnell’s opposition could slow the legislation, which would need to pass the GOP-held Senate.

Among possible details, Pelosi reportedly is angling to include a tax policy change that could benefit herself and other residents of high-property-tax areas.

Pelosi is working to modify the state and local tax deduction (SALT) cap, which allows tax filers to deduct a maximum $10,000 in state and local taxes from federal taxable income. A spokesperson said changes would be “tailored to focus on middle-class earners and include limitations on the higher end.”

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-NY), a key player in all coronavirus bill negotiations, said Wednesday that he wanted “green” infrastructure.

“We need it big, we need it bold, and we need it futuristic, which means green,” Schumer said on MSNBC. “There’s traditional infrastructure, roads, bridges, highways, we need that. But we also need new green infrastructure for the future so we should do that.”

The three prior coronavirus bills were the product of protracted bipartisan negotiations.

The third coronavirus bill topping $2 trillion became law Friday, boosting unemployment pay by $600 per week and sending $1,200 checks to adults who earn up to $75,000, with $500 more per child. The package created a $500 billion loan program for businesses and a separate $350 billion loan program for small businesses with forgivable loans if they don’t lay off workers.

A week prior, a bill funded free COVID-19 testing, boosted by billions per month funds for states, and required businesses to expand paid sick leave. An initial $8.3 billion deal passed in early March funding medical supplies, vaccine research and other response efforts.