Burger King is offering students free Whoppers for acing a different kind of virtual test.

With schools around the globe closed because of the coronavirus and lessons being held online, Burger King said Monday it "wants to reward students who are continuing to study hard through the worldwide pandemic."

Starting Monday and continuing through April 20, the fast-food chain says it will post a question each day on its social media channels, including its Facebook and Instagram pages. The questions will cover different subjects including math, biology, chemistry and literature.

Students need to enter their answer on the BK app to get the free Whopper sandwich with any purchase, Burger King said. There's a limit of one per student.

Free tacos!:Taco Bell giving away freebie Tuesday as part of its coronavirus response

Stress eating and coronavirus:WW, formerly known as Weight Watchers, rolls out Zoom virtual workshops

According to the fine print, the promotion is for registered BK app guests 18 and older, and guests between the ages of 13 and 18 with parental consent.

Not all restaurants accept digital coupons, and the coupon is not valid in Alaska and Hawaii. See full terms at www.bk.com/offer-terms.

The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization estimates school closures due to COVID-19 are affecting more than 91% of students worldwide – that's more than 1.5 billion students.

Steak 'n Shake gives away free fries

For a limited time, participating Steak 'n Shake restaurants are giving away free small orders of fries in the drive-thru.

No purchase is necessary to get the freebie, and there’s a limit of one order of free fries per person, the Indianapolis-based restaurant’s website notes.

"In such challenging times, we would like to do our part for our communities by giving out free fries to all," Steak 'n Shake CEO Sardar Biglari said in a news release.

According to the release, the freebie, which can be requested at the drive-thru of participating locations, is the company’s “way of thanking every single American who continues to play their part in restoring America.” It’s also part of the company's "We're All Essential" initiative, which launched in late March.

Consumers can get additional Steak 'n Shake specials by joining the chain’s rewards program at www.steaknshake.com/rewards and signing up for emails on the website.

Free coffee:Starbucks giving free coffee to first responders, healthcare workers dealing with coronavirus

COVID-19 brings massive changes to retail:Should shoppers be required to wear face masks? Can kids go to the store?

Follow USA TODAY reporter Kelly Tyko on Twitter: @KellyTyko

Share your thoughts with USA TODAY

What items are sold out when you shop or are you having a hard time finding? How many times a week on average are you ordering takeout or delivery from restaurants? Have you tried grocery delivery options and are you wearing masks when you leave your home?

Share your thoughts with USA TODAY for possible inclusion in our continuing COVID-19 coverage by filling out the form below or through this link.