"Rising" co-hosts Krystal Ball and Saagar Enjeti debated Democratic strategist and former Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump inflames red state-blue state coronavirus divide Sanders sends fundraising email for DNC MORE advisor Richard Goodstein on former Vice President Joe Biden Joe BidenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move GOP online donor platform expanded to state level Overnight Energy: US oil prices hit 18-year-low | Green groups, coal companies attack EPA power plant rollback from both sides | EPA weighs lifting ethanol requirements for oil refiners MORE's electability this November.

Ball pointed out that Biden has less of a lead over President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE in the polls than former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton did at this point in the election cycle in 2016.

Goodstein responded: "Presidents typically see this rally-around-the-flag phenomenon in the polls when there is a national crisis. Donald Trump is seeing less of that."

The conversation comes as Joe Biden has all but secured the Democratic nomination. Earlier this month, Biden's chief rival Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump inflames red state-blue state coronavirus divide Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (I-Vt.) dropped out of the race, rendering Biden the only remaining candidate in the 2020 Democratic Primary.

Shortly after Sanders's announcement, several prominent figures including Sanders himself, former President Barack Obama Barack Hussein ObamaCOVID-19: The leadership failure The Memo: Public may be more cautious than Trump on reopening Biden assembling White House transition team MORE, House Intelligence Chairman Adam Schiff Adam Bennett SchiffPelosi to appear on 'Fox News Sunday' for first time since 2017 Krystal and Saagar debate former Clinton advisor on Biden's electability Schiff throws support behind Biden MORE (D-Calif.) and Sen. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth WarrenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move McConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (D-Mass.) endorsed Biden for president.

Watch the full video above.