Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., meets with reporters during her weekly news conference at the Capitol in Washington, Thursday, Dec. 5, 2019. (AP Photo/J. Scott Applewhite)

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) was at it again during an appearance on MSNBC.

Guess who she was blaming for Americans losing their jobs? If you guessed that bad Orange Man, you would be correct.

MSNBC’s Ari Melber asks her about 22 million Americans being thrown out of work because of shut down orders in the various states. He sets the table for her asking if she views it as the fault of the pandemic or does she view it as “Trump’s recession?”

Unhinged: Nancy Pelosi calls the coronavirus fight a "Trump recession"https://t.co/MWhHldx8gt pic.twitter.com/SkOJQpHuvp — RNC Research (@RNCResearch) April 18, 2020

Now of course the economy was the strongest one in a generation, built largely because of the actions of President Donald Trump, with tax reform and low regulation, paving the way for a boom and the lowest unemployment in fifty years.

That’s the reality. But Pelosi, the woman who knows not to let a crisis go to waste, blames it on Trump not only without any pushback from Melber, but an assist from him.

Not only is Trump not responsible for the job loss, Pelosi is hugely responsible at this point. With each passing day that she refuses to pass a bill to refund the Paycheck Protection Program, more businesses go under and more Americans are thrown out of work. She knows that. Yet she’s still playing games to push her agenda points, with American lives in the balance.

She knows that she can just blame Trump and that a lot of the media will just provide cover for that lie and that also serves her purpose in the election, even if it hurts people.

As we noted she’s waiting for a “good offer” from Republicans, as if Americans suffering isn’t moving enough to her, even after she had no trouble passing $25 million to keep the Kennedy Center afloat. As we reported, Sen. Ted Cruz (R-TX) ripped her apart for that one.

She continued to lie with abandon during the interview, lying about there not being enough PPE, claiming Trump called the virus a hoax and saying he hadn’t used the Defense Production Act, claiming the situation was “largely of his making.”

Unhinged: Nancy Pelosi says the coronavirus crisis "is largely of [Trump's] making"https://t.co/BM3AHoXGLo pic.twitter.com/vQ400fDcBg — RNC Research (@RNCResearch) April 18, 2020

Really? Did he make China lie and cover up the virus and spread it to the rest of the world? Is he responsible for the people around the world getting it or the havoc it’s done to their economies?

Trump never called it a hoax and he’s already been using the DPA.

President @realDonaldTrump has DELIVERED ⬇️ ✅ 523 MILLION gloves

✅ 69 MILLION surgical masks

✅ 55 MILLION N95 respirators

✅ 10.5 MILLION surgical gowns

✅ 5.9 MILLION face shields

✅ 10,998 ventilators

✅ 8,450 federal medical station beds — Kayleigh McEnany (@PressSec) April 18, 2020

Nope, Nancy, he was addressing it while you were still encouraging people to go hang out in Chinatown and Democrats were criticizing cutting travel with China, calling it racist or xenophobic.

She really has no shame at all.