How is everybody holding up?

It’s been more than a month without baseball and, man, I’ll never make fun of having to watch a pitchers fielding practice again (don’t hold me to that, though, please). In the meantime, though, you’e got questions. Tons of questions. Was thrilled to see the variety of questions this week and I answered an extra long mailbag, which is why we are a little late in getting to you. But here you go. Thanks for participating.

Be well. Be safe. Stay well. And stay safe.

#EvanHelpUs Evan, if you had to make an ALL TIME Rangers lineup, including SP, setup man, closer, and skipper, what would it look like? Please include 3 bench players too. — Dick Savagewood (@VenomousStare) April 14, 2020

ME: Alright, let’s see what we do here. We are going to add a couple of rules. We are adding a super utility guy to the starters and we are going based on Rangers’ playing careers only. With a couple of these guys, they’d probably not make any team I would honor based on pending criminal/character issues. OK? Well, you don’t have a choice now.

Position players : C Ivan Rodriguez, 1B Mark Teixeira, 2B Ian Kinsler, SS Alex Rodriguez, 3B Adrian Beltre, LF Rusty Greer, CF Josh Hamilton, RF Juan Gonzalez, DH Rafael Palmeiro.

Super utility : INF Michael Young (he’s playing as much as a 10th starter).

Bench : C Jim Sundberg, INF Elvis Andrus, OF Ruben Sierra. Toughest omissions are: 1B Will Clark, IF Julio Franco and OF Nelson Cruz.

Pitching staff : RHP Nolan Ryan, LHP Kenny Rogers, RHP Kevin Brown, RHP Yu Darvish and RHP Colby Lewis.

Long man : RHP Charlie Hough.

Setup guy (since this is more of a 2000s category and is based on one year or two): You can have your pick of Jeff Zimmerman or Alexi Ogando.

Closer : RHP John Wetteland. Hard to leave RHPs Rick Helling and Ferguson Jenkins off this team.

Manager : Ron Washington.

#evanhelpus is there any game since 1947 that was televised you want to see rebroadcast? And why... — Jeff (@jfortneysr) April 14, 2020

ME: Yeah, the full game I’d like to watch most from start to finish, it would be August 12, 1984, the day of the legendary Braves-Padres brawl over Pascual Perez. I couldn’t watch it that day. My cousins were getting married. And I’ve never seen it from start to finish on tape. Sure, it’s not a game of great historical significance, but it is one game I would have loved to watch as everything developed. And I’d love to have watched it not as a 19-year-old back then, but as a more educated baseball reporter. What a day that was.

Also, I would have loved to have watched my cousin, Sid Gordon, who played fo the New York Giants, Boston Braves and Pittsburgh, in any game. Just to say I saw him. He retired more than a decade before I was born and passed away before I ever got a chance to meet him.

A historical game I’d like to see that I never actually got to watch from start to finish is Game 6 of the 1975 World Series, when Carlton Fisk hit a walkoff homer in the 12th inning for Boston (the famous waving the ball fair homer). I was 10. My folks would not let me stay up late as the game went into extra innings.

What factors go into teams choosing hotels on the road? #EvanHelpUs — Kyle Davis (@KyIeDavis) April 14, 2020

ME: The most important things are proximity and cost. But for a more nuanced understanding, I went to Rangers director of team travel Josh Shelton, who is very detailed in his approach. First, you should know this: Most teams stay at the same group of hotels. In each city, there may be a total of two or three hotels that end up getting baseball business for the season. Most of those hotels come to the winter meetings and meet with directors of team travel to work on details. Shelton does have a budget to maintain every year, but, hey, accommodations are negotiated in the CBA, so it’s not like Motel 6 is on the board. Here is some of what Shelton had to say about the process:

“It can vary by city. In some places it’s important, others not as much. More than anything, there are only a handful of properties in each city that we consider ‘baseball hotels’ that we all gravitate to. These hotels value the sports business, are pros with handling teams and the unique needs we have, and they have the amenities required to host us (hotel requirements are a negotiated item in the CBA, so we have to adhere to those standards to start with)."

He also said that he takes into consideration if players can get out of the hotel and walk around and what amenities might be found nearby. And, for the most part, teams are pretty loyal to their hotel deals. You don’t see a tremendous amount of change.

If the season isn't played, what team stands to lose the most on a final year of a contract?

Ex: Rangers lose their last chance to win with Minor and Choo#EvanHelpUs — Green Papa (@LaFlama_Blanca_) April 14, 2020

ME: While the Rangers would lose a year of service on those deals and both players would become free agents, the hands-down “biggest” loser in baseball would be the Los Angeles Dodgers, who traded for one year of MVP talent Mookie Betts and his $27 million salary. The Dodgers sent prospects OF Alex Verdugo, SS Jeter Downs and C Connor Wong to Boston in the deal that brought them Betts and David Price. It was supposed to put them over the top after two World Series losses in 2017 and 2018. Instead, they may end up getting nothing out of Betts and losing three prospects.

Good morning, Evan.



1. Do you foresee contraction in MLB's future?

2. If I could only go to one barbecue joint in DFW (once we're past the corona-craziness, that is), which one should I choose?#EvanHelpUs — Allen Jerkins (@AllenJerkins) April 14, 2020

ME: I don’t. If anything, I see expansion. MLB and its owners are going to want to rake in as much revenue as possible when baseball gets back to any semblance of normalcy. Getting two expansion teams, and the hefty fees that would come along with it, would be a big step toward recouping some lost cash. That’s as simple as I can put it. I know Tampa Bay, Miami and Oakland aren’t doing very well right now, but I’d bet those teams relocated, if anything. Besides, if MLB contracted, they’d likely have to pay those ownership groups some significant coin for giving up the franchise. Not going to happen. A 32-team MLB with eight four-team divisions is what I see in the not-so-distant future, providing we get back to a normalized society. Would love to see Nashville and Vegas or Portland added. In either of those last two cities, though, you’ve got to have a retractable roof. In Vegas for the heat; in Portland for the rain.

BBQ: I can’t pick one. And won’t right now because of this: The BBQ community in DFW has really come together to help folks out in a rough, rough time. Dinner Bell, started by Pecan Lodge, is helping to serve first responders and health care workers. Cattleack’s Todd David this week gave out free Wagyu brisket to families in need. I would say this: Most BBQ places in town are locally-owned. And as long as you support locally-owned, you are doing good. When this is over, I’m hopeful I’ll get to support a ton of locally-owned places. That said, Heim BBQ of Fort Worth was scheduled to open near Love Field this spring and if their bacon burnt ends are a little more geographically desirable, I might be in Hog heaven.

Favorite easy quarantine recipes.. fewer ingredients the better. #EvanHelpUs — C Coker (@proudmissbailey) April 14, 2020

ME: Here are two Italian recipes we’ve made: A creamy shrimp scampi and chicken picatta. Both are super easy. On the scampi, if you don’t have creme fraiche, you can easily substitute sour cream. Wednesday, I marinated some flank steak in soy sauce, balsamic vinegar, honey, oil and Worcestershire sauce. Added a little garlic powder and some Italian seasoning. Whisked it together and threw it in a ziploc bag and let it sit for 2 hours, then cooked it for about 4 minutes per side in a cast-iron skillet. Simple basic things.

I’ve tried my hand at a little baking. Here is a recipe for Chocolate rugelach, a pastry found in Jewish delis. Baking scares me. But if I can do this, believe me, you can.

Are you satisfied with the changes the team made to the uniforms this offseason? What would have been a preferred route to take with the changes if not? Personally I love the piping and the script 'Rangers' being back on the home unis, but don't love the powder blues. #EvanHelpUs — Brandon Crosby (@brandoncrosby) April 14, 2020

ME: Until the Rangers went to red in 1994 as their predominant color, I was never a big fun of the uniforms. Now, remember, I didn’t grow up with them. But I thought the exaggerated block letters of the ’70s were awkward and thought the Rangers script of the ’80s was a little plain. And I was never a fan of any team’s baby/powder blue jerseys, save for maybe the Cardinals (because even the powder blue couldn’t mess up that clean logo). So, maybe I’m not the best judge of this stuff.

But, look, the players love the powder blues and I think they do pop a little more than I expected. I’m not sure about the powder blue hats, but it adds a new twist, for sure. About the home whites with script "Rangers”, I do like the red-white-and blue design on the script and the red, white and blue piping.

Personally, I’m just more of a fan of red being the dominant color scheme. Aside from alternate tops, that’s not what the Rangers’ research shows is popular with fans, so the think that guides me here is: What makes fans happy? I know this: For so many of us, baseball is a sport that evokes memories and that’s why it is so popular as a generational thing from parents to kids. I know when I see the Braves in their lower case script A and the feather on their sleeves, throwbacks to the mid-1970s, I get mesmerized. So, that’s just a personal feel. I imagine there is some of that pull with fans of a certain age and the powder blues.

What restaurant will you miss the most if you don't get to go on the road this year covering the Rangers?#EvanHelpUs — Eric Nadel (@nadeler) April 14, 2020

ME: I think the answer is the same for both of us, isn’t it? The great Henry’s Hunan of San Francisco. I don’t know what I will do if I have to go a whole year between batches of their shrimp and black bean sauce. If we could just go there once, I might even eat some of the yellow curry you’ve been having lately.

In all honesty folks, the great Eric Nadel, so kind to send in a question, introduced me to Henry’s in 1997 on my first trip to the Bay Area with the Rangers. We’ve gone at least once on EVERY trip to the Bay Area since. Often more than once. Hot, spicy, savory, umami. Just so many fun meals and discussions and group get-togethers there that it is a fundamental part of our season. There is a book in the making: Lunches with Henry. Maybe that’s the title of Eric Nadel biography I hope to one day co-author with him.

Will not being able to play hurt or hold back minor leaguers chances of succeeding? #EvanHelpUs — Adam Gordon (@AdamGordon1977) April 14, 2020

ME: What’s that they say about chicken soup? It couldn’t hurt? Well, the opposite would be true here: It couldn’t help, except maybe in the rare cases of guys who were going to spend this year rehabbing from arm surgery. A lost year is a lost year. Simple as that. Having no at-bats means making no progress. The minor leagues are all about reps and experience. That’s how guys get better. If you can’t do that, you risk taking a step back. I guess the one thing is, all minor leaguers would then be on equal footing next year and the impact would be universal. But I just can’t imagine it’s good for anybody.

Could you beat Jimmy Buffett in a bicycle race? #EvanHelpUs — The Rise of TyWalker (@TyWalker716) April 14, 2020

ME: The only musician I’m willing to take on in a bike race is Willie Nelson. And only if he’s high. Otherwise, they’d all kick my fat butt. For a guy who is now in his 70s, Buffett is still very active and lean. As he told me in the phone interview I once got to do with him, he may sip some tequila now and then, but he’s not doing the margarita thing often, if at all. Too much sugar. For a guy who spends so much time singing about food and alcohol, he seems to be remarkably disciplined.

#Evanhelpus what is your favorite Grateful Dead song? — Robert Fuld (@Aikoprod) April 14, 2020

ME: I’m a Parrothead, not a Dead Head, so my knowledge isn’t great. But I like Scarlet Begonias, Uncle John’s Band and Truckin. I ain’t much for the deep tracks on the Dead. Respect their place in American music, but nobody ever discusses how good my taste in music is. Look, if XM/Sirius gave me three channels: Classic Rock of the cassette era, Radio Margaritaville and the periodic Billy Joel channel, I’d be fat and happy. As is, I’m mostly just fat.

Let’s go down the rabbit hole...

If Cruz makes the catch in Game 6 2011 and Rangers win the WS:

1. How do future signings look?

2. What about the 2012 draft? Do we still get Gallo/Brinson/Williams?

3. How long into 2012 before Fire JD crowd starts complaining again? #EvanHelpUs — Josh Rowe (@jrowe254) April 14, 2020

ME: Well, the Rangers still got their primary target for 2012, Yu Darvish. They were in on Prince Fielder before he signed with Detroit, but I don’t think winning the World Series would have pushed them to go to the extreme lengths Detroit did on their deal. If anything, it might have made them a tiny bit more conservative because they would have already had a world championship and wouldn’t have to be scrambling to find that last piece.

As for the draft, don’t think anything changes, at least not in first round. The draft order was determined by overall record, not playoff finish. The Rangers drafted ahead of the Yankees, who finished with a 97-65 record to Texas’ 96-66 in the regular season. Do they still invest in the same players that they did? Yeah. Don’t think anything changes there.

Now, the Nolan-JD thing, man, I don’t know what happens there. Both guys were driven to try to improve a club that was so close. Would Ryan have pushed as hard for Tim Purpura as farm director at that point, which was one of the fulcrums for their disagreement? Or would he have simply turned things over to Daniels lock, stock and barrel as the reigning GM of the world champions. Now, the situation with Ryan didn’t really become a heated topic until 2013 when the Rangers sought to remove the title of president of the club from Ryan’s oversight and give that, on the business side, to Rick George. It left Ryan as CEO with, in his mind, no real ability to make any decisions. My verdict: If Rangers win in 2011, people are a lot happier and Ryan leaves Daniels to handle baseball and is happy to slowly be eased towards retirement on a two- or three-year arc.

It’s an interesting discussion.

Can the pattern of the “grass” at GLF be modified like they would with real grass or will it always be the way it is now? #EvanHelpUs — Sean Graves (@SeanMGraves) April 14, 2020

ME: Short answer is no. It’s actually two different shades of color to create the mowed effect. Now, it can be painted on top of for, say, an Opening Day logo or a postseason logo, but to change the mowing patterns, no, that’s not really viable.

Find more Rangers stories from The Dallas Morning News here.