Cleaning wipes are hard to find—here's where you can still buy them

Yes, you can still ordering cleaning wipes and spray online. (Photo: Getty Images / AdamRadosavljevic)

— Recommendations are independently chosen by Reviewed’s editors. Purchases you make through our links may earn us a commission.

As the number of confirmed coronavirus (COVID-19) cases in the U.S. continues to grow, more families are searching for ways to buy hand sanitizer, toilet paper, and other household essentials in the event that COVID-19—which has officially been declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO)—seriously disrupts their lives or leads to a full-scale quarantine.

One of the biggest problems right now though? Most of those everyday products are selling out at lightning-quick speeds. This is especially the case when it comes to cleaning wipes, which topped the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) list of disinfectants that can help protect against COVID-19.

Of course, finding cleaning wipes right now is also a serious challenge. Whatever you do, don't panic—you can still get your hands on enough for the whole family (and skip the big crowds in-stores right now) if you shop at these online retailers. While we'll be updating this list daily, supplies are selling out extremely fast, so we recommend not putting it off more than you need to. Here are the places online where you can buy cleaning wipes right now:

Where to buy cleaning wipes and spray

Cleaning wipes that actually disinfect surfaces are one of the hardest things to find right now, but you can still get them, specifically at the following retailers:

Staples

Walmart

Target

How to use cleaning wipes

If you already have cleaning wipes around the house, you still want to be certain that you're using them the right way. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), disinfection doesn't happen immediately—it can actually take up to three to five minutes.

Although wipes are on the EPA's list of disinfectants, you may not be enough to keep whatever surface you're cleaning—like a countertop, for instnace—wet for the recommended amount of time to kill germs.

As a good rule of thumb, you may want to set a timer so you can monitor surfaces and ensure they're still wet. You may also want to make sure that you're sanitizing frequently used objects and surfaces daily, especially things like doorknobs, keyboards, faucet handles, and more. You don't want to forget your phone, either—you can even use Clorox wipes or 70% isopropyl alcohol on Apple products, according to Apple.

Jonathan Chan, senior lab testing technician at Reviewed, recommends following best practices, and advises that if you're using wipes, you should make sure you're only wiping in one one direction, as studies have suggested that doing so can reduce the risk of recontamination.

The product experts at Reviewed have all your shopping needs covered. Follow Reviewed on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram for the latest deals, reviews, and more.

Prices were accurate at the time this article was published but may change over time.

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/reviewedcom/2020/04/17/where-you-can-still-buy-cleaning-wipes-during-coronavirus-pandemic/5156158002/