The Twitter spat between President Donald Trump and George Conway continued on Tuesday after Trump's 2020 campaign manager, Brad Parscale, said Conway was "jealous" of his wife Kellyanne's success.

The tit-for-tat began on Monday when Conway warned that Trump's weekend Twitter meltdown was a symptom of psychiatric disorders.

Parscale lashed out at Conway Monday night, accusing him of being "jealous" of his spouse's close relationship with the president.

"We all know that @ realDonaldTrump turned down Mr. Kellyanne Conway for a job he desperately wanted," Parscale tweeted. "He barely worked @ TheJusticeDept and was either fired/quit, didn’t want the scrutiny? Now he hurts his wife because he is jealous of her success. POTUS doesn’t even know him!"

Trump retweeted Parscale Tuesday morning, calling Conway a "total loser."

Less than 15 minutes later, Conway shot a bullseye at Trump, whose juvenile tweet bolstered Conway's Monday prognosis of Narcissistic Personality Disorder.

"Congratulations! You just guaranteed that millions of more people are going to learn about narcissistic personality disorder and malignant narcissism! Great job!"

This is crazy.

Conway's dissent has not convinced everyone, however.

Some within the "resistance" movement believe the Conways are playing both sides.

Former GOP operative Cheri Jacobus thinks Conway's criticism of Trump is engineered to appeal to the "never Trump" wing of the Republican Party, which she believes is using Trump to stack the judiciary with right-wing judges like Brett Kavanaugh, who replaced Anthony Kennedy on the Supreme Court last year.

Jacobus is not alone in her theory.

People, understandably, have additional questions. Notably, why is Mrs. Conway's loyalty to Trump unwaivering?

Jacobus says that the answer is simple: we are all being played.

She may be onto something here. A decade ago, Trump was praising Conway's legal prowess.

The Washington Post published a letter from Trump to the conservative attorney an hour after Trump insulted him.

"I wanted to thank you for your wonderful assistance in ridding Trump World Tower of some very bad people. What I was most impressed with was how quickly you were able to comprehend a very bad situation. In any event, the building has now been normalized, and the employees are no longer doing menial tasks, etc. for our former Board Members."

"PS—And, you have a truly great voice," Trump added, "certainly not a bad asset for a top trial lawyer!”

Nevertheless, the president's declining mental state is becoming more evident every day. And if this is one big joke, Trump is assuredly not in the loop.