Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton waves to well-wishers following an appearance at Barnard College with New York Governor Andrew Cuomo, Monday, Jan. 7, 2019, in New York, where the pair called for codifying abortion rights into New York State law. The two Democrats shared the stage Monday where members of the state Legislature and women’s rights advocates cheered Clinton as she said the struggle for women’s equality “continues to be the fight of our lifetime.” (AP Photo/Kathy Willens)

Color me shocked, shocked I tell you, that it was actually Hillary Clinton via her proxies that were colluding with the Russians in 2016.

To be clear, this isn’t even up for debate at this point. Recently released documents show a disturbing pattern of malfeasance within the FBI and by Christopher Steele himself, who at one point was being paid by the government and political operatives at the same time. My colleague streiff covered the revelation that the FBI was well aware they were being fed Russian disinformation, yet they continued to use it anyway.

Consider that. Russian oligarchs who were supplying information to Steele were also in direct contact with the FBI. The FBI was sufficiently suspicious of Steele’s contacts with the Russian oligarchy that they considered reviewing his reliability. SCOOP @CBSNews obtains newly declassified footnotes IG report w/multiple warnings to FBI about dossier, Russian targeting, disinformation. Footnote 342 “two persons affiliated with (Russian Intel) were aware of Steele’s election investigation in early July 2016” #MyHighlighter pic.twitter.com/HKUqPJckc8 — Catherine Herridge (@CBS_Herridge) April 15, 2020 The FBI was not duped, they knew they about Steele’s sources and were willing co-conspirators to launder his Russian disinformation to the FISA court.

Figures like James Comey and Andrew McCabe knew they were being fed trash and still went on CNN and feigned ignorance anyway. It’s pretty disgusting stuff and a gross abuse of power.

Now, we are learning more about some of the sources involved in all this and they don’t paint a pretty picture. Per The Daily Caller, one of the sources was not only a fan of Hillary Clinton and clearly compromised politically, but he also had contacts directly with the Kremlin.

A source of information for the Steele dossier had contacts with a Kremlin insider in early summer 2016, and also voiced “strong support” for Hillary Clinton, according to information declassified Wednesday. Other declassified information shows that the U.S. intelligence community told the FBI in 2017 that two Russian intelligence officers were aware as of July 2016 that Christopher Steele, the author of the dossier, was investigating Donald Trump. The FBI also received evidence in early 2017, just after the dossier was published, that Russian operatives might have fed disinformation that ended up in the dossier.

Try to imagine the reaction if this had been Donald Trump’s campaign paying for a foreign spy to mine Russian sources. We really don’t have to imagine, because that’s akin to the charge Democrats and the media made toward Trump for literally years.

I’ve written countless words on the Steele dossier, so I’ll digress early on this one, but the hypocrisy that’s been shown over this issue is just incredible. People need to pay a price, whether we are talking about the Democrats who mined Russians or the FBI officials who gave it credence.

Front-page contributor for RedState. Visit my archives for more of my latest articles and help out by following me on Twitter @bonchieredstate. Read more by Bonchie