The Treasury Department and the Internal Revenue Service launched a new web tool on Friday that will allow Americans to register for stimulus payments.

The non-filer tool provides a free option designed for people who don’t normally file a tax return, including those with too little income to file. The IRS said stimulus payments will be distributed to most Americans starting the week of April 13.

“People who don’t have a return filing obligation can use this tool to give us basic information so they can receive their Economic Impact Payments as soon as possible,” IRS Commissioner Chuck Rettig said in a statement. “The IRS and Free File Alliance have been working around the clock to deliver this new tool to help people.”

Save better, spend better:Money tips and advice delivered right to your inbox. Sign up here

When are stimulus checks coming?:Money could roll out to Americans soon

Coronavirus:How far will your $1,200 stimulus check go?

How do I use the IRS tool?

For those who don’t normally file a tax return, visit IRS.gov and look for “Non-Filers: Enter Payment Info Here.” Then provide information including your Social Security number, name, address, and dependents.

The IRS will use this information to confirm eligibility and send a stimulus payment. Using the tool to get your payment won’t result in any taxes being owed. Entering bank or financial account information will allow the IRS to deposit your payment directly in your account. Otherwise, your payment will be mailed to you.

Who should use it?

This tool is designed for people who didn’t file a tax return for 2018 or 2019 and who don’t receive Social Security retirement or disability benefits or Railroad Retirement benefits.

Lower income households should also consider using the tool if they haven’t filed a 2018 or 2019 return because they were under the normal income limits for filing a tax return. This may include single filers who made under $12,200 and married couples making less than $24,400 in 2019.

Supplemental Security Income recipients and those who receive veterans disability compensation, pension or survivor benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs who did not file a tax return for the 2018 or 2019 tax years can either use the IRS’s web portal.

Social Security, Social Security Disability Insurance and Railroad Retirement beneficiaries will automatically receive $1,200 payments. Those in this group who have qualifying children under age 17 may use the tool to claim the $500 payment per child.