The only thing certain about today’s municipal elections in Chicago is that it will settle little to nothing. From the mayoral race to a score of aldermanic elections, few if any of the most contentious races will have an outright winner; they’ll be settled in an April runoff. But today’s election is the most important Chicago has seen in a generation, with an opportunity to make significant progress in breaking from the neoliberal status quo that has dominated the city’s politics in recent years. Chicago’s 2019 municipal elections are a microcosm of our national politics. The political class is scrambling to cope with a population that is furious about inequality, manifesting everywhere in daily life from commuting to work to paying the rent, but also desperate to continue doing nothing about it. The latest battle for Chicago began last September when Mayor Rahm Emanuel announced he was not running for a third term. After a mad scramble of twenty-one candidate vying to replace him, the final number of candidates on the ballot is fourteen. Yet despite the enormous number running, the differences between them range from slim to none. But in December, the Ed Burke corruption scandal broke. Burke, a fifty-year veteran of the city council, is at the center of the biggest corruption scandal in years — one that has threatened much of the city’s political establishment. The scandal soiled the two leading candidates at the time, Toni Preckwinkle, the chair of the Cook County Democratic Party and the current president of the Cook County Board, and Susana Mendoza, the Illinois comptroller, who both share extensive ties to Burke. Things took a bizarre turn in January, when it was revealed that longtime Chicago alderman Danny Solis was wiring a wire for nearly two years for the FBI, recording the most private of political conversations with local and state leaders of the Democratic Party, including Burke. Solis hasn’t been seen in public since then. The Burke-Solis scandals have pulled back the mask of the corrupt relationship between the real-estate goliath gentrifying Chicago and the political class that serves it. This not small change political corruption but involves millions in various and sundry payoffs to remold what Chicago will look like for the next century. While the mayor’s race comes to an inconclusive end — none of the leading candidates break 20 percent in the most recent poll of likely voters, and a majority vote is required to win — the most important elections to keep an eye on are the aldermanic contests, where socialists are fighting for the largest number of seats on the city council in living memory.

Mayor 1% Collapses What was so surprising about Mayor Emanuel’s fall was that everything appeared to be going his way. His strongest and likely opponent, Jesus “Chuy” Garcia, who forced Rahm into a run-off in 2015, was anointed the successor to retiring US representative Luis Gutierrez. Gutierrez, a longtime Rahm ally and national advocate for immigrant rights, orchestrated Garcia’s move into a safe congressional seat. With Garcia off to Washington, Rahm’s reelection appeared secure. Rahm was also getting his signature projects passed with little opposition. In one week in late May 2018, he won two major votes on the city council for the Obama Presidential Library in Jackson Park and a new police academy, to be built to the tune of $95 million on the West Side. In both cases, the city council voted 48-1 to approve both projects that would accelerate the rapid gentrification of working-class, black communities. The virtually unanimous vote demonstrated, once again, how much of a rubber stamp the city council was for Rahm. Alderman Carlos Ramirez-Rosa, a member of the Democratic Socialists of America, was the sole dissenting vote on the cop academy. And Emanuel was sitting on a mountain of cash for a third run. By late July 2018, his campaign war chest had swelled to $8 million, with the prospect of much more money coming his way. Few contenders could compete in the money race with him. Emanuel was already a legend in the Democratic Party for his fundraising abilities, but there was little secret to his success. If you didn’t pay up, you didn’t get access or contracts. Much of his contributions were from the city’s hospitality and tourist businesses, which flourished under him, along with construction companies and investment companies. Everyone I knew expected him to run again and win (including me). What happened? We may have to wait several years for a credible insider account of the decision-making that led to his withdrawal. But his pollsters must have warned him that his support was narrow and weak, and that the right sort of contender could defeat him. His own statements on withdrawing weren’t credible. The answer had to lay somewhere else. Rahm was never a popular mayor either politically or personally, despite winning two elections. His famously thuggish personality — which he confessed to in a 2015 election commercial — combined with his ruthless pursuit of a political agenda that made the ultra-rich richer led him to be tagged as “Mayor 1%” early in his administration. His failed effort during the last two years of his administration to lure Amazon to Chicago to build its new “HQ2” reinforced this image. He and former Illinois governor Bruce Rauner offered Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos over $2.2 billion in tax breaks and the choicest land in the city for his new headquarters. But it was the historic 2012 Chicago Teachers strike, led by the Chicago Teachers Union (CTU), that permanently tarnished him as an opponent of progressive unions and community groups fighting educational apartheid. The strike and the CTU’s continued role in city politics has elevated other working-class struggles in the city, from housing rights to fighting police racism. The CTU endorsed a Black Friday 2015 protest march on Chicago’s famed shopping district the “Magnificent Mile” — a magnet for tourists — in response to the city releasing the long-suppressed dash cam video of the murder of seventeen-year-old Laquan McDonald by Chicago police officer Jason Van Dyke. CTU members even voted to call on him to resign in the wake of the scandal. McDonald was shot sixteen times by Van Dyke on October 20, 2014. The video was considered so politically explosive and detrimental to Rahm’s reelection that his administration suppressed it. Emails later released under court order revealed a panicked administration doing everything it could to keep it out of the public eye. The city even settled with the McDonald family for $5 million, even though they hadn’t filed a lawsuit. Rahm’s fears about the political impact of the video were confirmed in December 2015, when 51 percent of likely voters said they believed he should have resigned, and 67 percent disapproved of his job performance for handling of the case. Despite the unified support that Rahm had from business and the city council, the prospect of seeking reelection to a third term was uncertain at best with the trial of Jason Van Dyke on the horizon. He chose to bow out rather than face defeat and humiliation.

The Socialist Challenge The Burke-Solis corruption scandals have revealed the political-real-estate-financial complex that is at the heart of the rapid gentrification of Chicago. Working-class Chicago is disappearing from the city under the crushing weight of neoliberalism. “Chicago is one of the last major cities that you could possibly call working class,” Amisha Patel of the Grassroots Collaborative told In These Times. “And that label is certainly disintegrating quickly as prices are escalating across neighborhoods, from Woodlawn to Logan Square.” Rahm is using his final months in office to push through mega-development projects such as Lincoln Yards, where a billion dollars in tax money will subsidize a mega-real-estate development that will not simply change the Chicago skyline but massively accelerate gentrification on the city’s North Side. Taking on the real-estate developers and the political class that serves it will determine much of the future of working-class Chicago, and is at the heart of socialist challenges in key aldermanic races, especially in wards targeted for gentrification. Currently, one DSA member, Ramirez-Rosa, sits on the city council. If he is joined by one or two others, it will be the largest socialist presence at City Hall in one hundred years. Byron Sigcho Lopez is running to replace the disgraced Solis in the Twenty-Fifth Ward. The heart of the ward is Pilsen, a community ravaged by gentrification. Over ten thousand Latinos from the historically Mexican-American community have left since 2000. The Eighteenth Street retail district that runs through the heart of Pilsen is unrecognizable from a few years ago, now dotted with expensive shops and restaurants with valet parking. Ramirez-Rosa, a nationally known DSA member, is running for reelection in the Thirty-Fifth Ward. The heart of the ward is Logan Square, where “between 2000 and 2014, about 19,200 Hispanic residents moved out, a 35.6 percent decrease.” Four years ago, Rosa defeated then-alderman Rey Colon, a frontman for the Logan Square real-estate mogul Mark Fishman, who was recently described as “the face of gentrification in the neighborhood.” Fishman is supporting Ramirez-Rosa’s opponent in this election, Amanda Yu Dieterich, but few believe she has a chance at defeating him. In the Thirty-Third Ward, another DSA member, Rosanna Rodriguez-Sanchez, is challenging Alderman Deb Mell, of the infamous Mell political dynasty. Her brother-in-law is former Illinois governor Rod Blagojevich, who is serving a fourteen-year prison sentence for public corruption. The heart of the Thirty-Third Ward is Albany Park, one of the most ethnically diverse neighborhoods in the city and whose long-term residents are facing mass evictions as the neighborhood gentrifies. Like Yu Dieterich’s, Deb Mell’s campaign is heavily financed by real-estate developers. Like Rosa’s, Rodriguez-Sanchez’s campaign has widespread support from progressive unions, community groups, and socialists. In the Fortieth Ward, DSA members Ugo Okere (who is endorsed by DSA) and Andre Vasquez are challenging incumbent Alderman Pat O’Connor, Rahm’s floor leader on the city council. O’Connor has now been appointed to replace Ed Burke as chair of the city council’s finance committee, making him one of the most powerful politicians in Chicago. Historian Rick Perlstein, who moderated the first aldermanic debate in the Fortieth Ward, called O’Connor “a racist troll” on Facebook after he made blatantly bigoted comments about Okere’s Nigerian heritage. Perhaps unsurprisingly, O’Connor’s wife Barbara is a major player in real estate. In the Twentieth Ward, where Toni Preckwinkle was alderman for two decades, DSA-endorsed candidate Jeanette Taylor, a mother of five and former Dyett High School hunger striker, is running against eight other candidates for alderman. In a recent interview in Jacobin, she said, referring to the Obama presidential library pushed hard by Emanuel: The ward as a whole is in jeopardy from the Obama library. All of a sudden, parts of the ward are getting clean, there are lights, they’re making it pretty. That’s not for us. That’s for selling it. They’re going to say you’re fifteen minutes away from the Obama center. Move in. The entire ward will be a victim of this placement if we don’t get an elected official who is willing to stand up and fight for this community. Meanwhile, DSA member Pete DeMay is making his second attempt to unseat Twelfth Ward alderman George Cardenas, a major ally of Rahm. Cardenas recently received a $20,000 campaign donation from Rahm’s super PAC. Beyond the DSA is another layer of challengers to the status quo politicians endorsed by the United Working Families of Illinois, including Erika Wozniak Francis, a CTU delegate running in the Forty-Sixth Ward and Maria Hadden in the Forty-Ninth.