CLOSE

Officials hope a new bridge connecting I-10 to Fairway Drive in Avondale will ease congestion and give truck drivers a direct route to the city’s distribution centers. (Photo: Joshua Bowling/The Republic)

Truck drivers will find it easier to get a hot meal along Arizona freeways after Gov. Doug Ducey allowed food trucks to operate at some state rest areas.

Ducey issued an executive order Wednesday help long-haul truck drivers by allowing the food trucks to work at eight Arizona Department of Transportation rest areas in the state.

The designated rest areas, which are along interstate freeways, are: Sunset Point and Christensen along I-17; Haviland, Parks and Meteor Crater along I-40; and Ehrenberg, Burnt Wells and Sacaton along I-10.

While restrictions and social distancing guidelines due to coronavirus are still in effect, truck drivers continue to go to work.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Normally, truck drivers are required to rest for 30 minutes for every eight-hour drive. According to Tony Bradley, the president and CEO of the Arizona Trucking Association, drivers rest and get dinner at restaurants or malls. But most restaurants and malls are closed now.

Ryan Harding, a public information officer for ADOT, said in a statement to the Arizona Republic, while truck drivers are taking a break at a rest area, the food trucks provide a way for drivers to get a nutritious meal.

Food truck owners can decide where they want to set up and for how long, while also coordinating with ADOT about their plans.

ADOT set up portable toilets and hand-washing stations at the Parks and Christensen rest areas, on I-40 and I-17 respectively, for truck drivers to use, spokesperson Ryan Harding said in an email.

The use of portable facilities allowed ADOT to temporarily reopen the rest areas, "so truckers would have more places to park and take a break during the current public health situation," the email said.

A food truck owner can apply for a permit, which is valid for any of the eight rest areas for 30 days, Harding said. The permit allows food trucks to operate at rest areas from 30 minutes prior to sunrise until 30 minutes after sunset.

"This is another way Arizona is supporting them," Harding said.

ADOT recently opened two rest areas in northern Arizona for truck drivers to support the trucking industry.

Food truck owners can visit azdot.gov/permits and apply for the permit at no charge. Click on the Encroachment Permits tab.

Reach the breaking news reporter at tina.giuliano@arizonarepublic.com and follow her on Twitter @TinaMGiuliano.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-breaking/2020/04/16/food-trucks-now-allowed-operate-some-rest-areas-az-freeways/5148132002/