Known for the honey bears he paints in San Francisco, the street artist known as fnnch has a new series in the Castro. Nine masked bears — one holding a wine glass, another designed like a pump-bottle of sanitizer — cover the boarded-up doors and windows of neighborhood institutions like Nizario’s Pizza, the Sausage Factory and Moby Dick.

Even before COVID-19 sent California into near-lockdown, the neighborhood was afflicted with numerous commercial vacancies. Now, the Castro, along with its unique institutions and patterns of everyday life, is staring down an existential crisis. And it’s hardly alone. From the Mission’s 24th Street corridor to Japantown, the pandemic and prolonged shutdown threaten some of San Francisco’s most cherished, and iconic, neighborhoods.

The neighborhoods hadn’t exactly prepared for a pandemic, but over the past few years, nine of them formed city-sanctioned cultural districts. The concept was designed to prevent residential displacement and protect historically important businesses that serve a specialized customer base. Earlier this year, the Castro launched one as well, electing the first members to its advisory board.

City funding for the districts came after a 2018 ballot measure (Proposition E) reallocated hotel-tax revenue to the arts. With occupancy rates currently in the single digits — and a projected municipal budget deficit as high as $1.7 billion — there has been some uncertainty over the level of continued funding. But Prop. E accounted for crisis, according to Julia Sabory, cultural districts manager with the Mayor’s Office of Housing and Community Development. It caps the total annual increase or decrease of the hotel-tax allocations at 10 percent. “So that is huge for us to continue our work.”

This year, the districts shared a $3 million pot. Even if only a handful of tourists visited San Francisco during the next two years, that would still mean $2.43 million in 2022. Although the districts “are in very different places in their development,” Sabory says, she expects most of the money will be used to support small businesses, arts programming and people facing displacement.

Still, the task of promoting neighborhood culture just got a lot more herculean now that the coronavirus has been added to the already-immense forces of gentrification. Dividing $3 million to help keep the Castro gay, the Bayview black, Japantown Japanese and Central SoMa Filipino looks like an impossible task.

In the Tenderloin, for instance, the work of the Compton’s Transgender Cultural District has essentially gone online — a sensible move but perhaps a vexing one. The district, after all, made itself known most visibly by repainting the Tenderloin’s lampposts and streetlights with the pink-white-and-blue colors of the Transgender Pride flag. “We’re working on doing some content and hangouts and really creating a social space even in the midst of social distancing for trans people to stay connected and to minimize isolation,” says executive director Aria Sa’id. “We still do mini-activations. We’re trying. The district is trying to power on even with uncertainty.”

In western SoMa, the Leather and LGBTQ Cultural District is no stranger to loss. Formed in 2018 to protect a traditionally working-class neighborhood with decades of queer history, it encompasses a nightlife zone where bars and clubs like the Eagle, the Stud, and Oasis were thriving right up until the pandemic hit. At the same time, it has a melancholy mission of promoting awareness of the dozens of bars and LGBTQ spaces that were lost to displacement and the HIV/AIDS crisis — plus entire generations of gay men.

“We were just at the point of beginning to launch our public-facing programs,” says Bob Goldfarb, the leather district’s board president. “We’re probably going to be fairly constrained in our ability to do that. We’re going to be looking for outside grants and private foundations.”

Right now, the district’s priority is assessing whether any businesses within its footprint may be in jeopardy. So far, Goldfarb says, they don’t fully know. Still, it has executed one highly visible project: A short block of 12th Street between Harrison and Bernice streets will soon become the pedestrian-only Eagle Plaza, with a giant Leather Pride flag already flying above.

Even districts like Japantown, which has been woven into the general public’s consciousness for decades, haven’t been spared. This weekend’s Northern California Cherry Blossom Festival is online-only — a major blow to neighborhood merchants that serve an ethnic population that dispersed long ago. Japantown will continue to exist, says Nina Bakan-Sakamoto, cultural district project manager with the Japantown Task Force, but it’s drastically scaling back plans, like a Grand Launch party scheduled for October.

One ray of hope may be SOMA Pilipinas, which covers a vast swath of central SoMa. It has fairly diversified income streams and past donations from private entities, according to Desi Danganan, the executive director of Kultivate Labs and Undiscovered SF, major players within the Filipino heritage district. Civic groups have already rallied to organize food banks and check-ins on seniors and low-income individuals.

“Filipino culture is all about adaptation,” he says. “We’re a group of islands that always get hit by hurricanes and crazy storms, and because of that our community and our people have learned to adapt in times of crisis, making do with what we got and helping one another.”

Still, Mestiza Taqueria, a fusion restaurant within the district that was on the San Francisco Chronicle’s Top 100 Restaurants of 2019, announced its closure this week. “Our big fear is there’s going to be more,” says Danganan. A survey of entrepreneurs within the heritage district revealed that 60% had only two months’ worth of cash — “and that was like two weeks ago. We’re on this path of seeing more than half our Filipino businesses closing.”

This, then, is the grim reality: SOMA Pilipinas and the Castro LGBTQ district are still in their infancy. Their governing organizations may have to pull back just as the businesses they were designed to protect need them most. After years of hard work, displacement may only accelerate. The virus may prove less lethal than its aftermath.

Peter Lawrence Kane is the communications manager of San Francisco Pride and a former editor of SF Weekly. Email: culture@sfchronicle.com