Trump may have violated the law even by offering his daughter this position.

Ivanka Trump on Wednesday confirmed that Trump's nepotistic quest to install his family members into key government positions goes further than originally thought.

In an interview with the Associated Press, the first daughter confirmed that Trump offered her the role as head of the World Bank — but that she turned it down, telling her father that she is "happy with the work" she does as a vague "senior adviser" at the White House.

Of course, Ivanka Trump has few qualifications to be leader of the World Bank, which provides low-interest loans to developing countries and advises those countries on how to invest their funds.

Advertisement Loading...

Prior to her father's election, Ivanka ran a clothing line that bears her name — which shuttered thanks in part to the fact that the Trump name has been irreparably tarnished by her father's presidency.

Ivanka Trump has made some much-publicized efforts to help women in developing countries while serving in her father's administration. But those efforts haven't lived up the hype; her main "Women’s Global Development and Prosperity Initiative," for instance, would only have provided $1 toward each women in the program.

This isn't the only job Trump reportedly offered to his daughter. Back in February, he considered nominating her to be United Nations ambassador — yet another job she is not remotely qualified to hold.

That time, Ivanka Trump refused to comment on whether her dad ever offered her the UN ambassador job, telling the Associated Press that she was going to "keep that between" them.

That was a smart move on her part, given that it would violate anti-nepotism laws for her father to advocate for giving her that job.

But now that Ivanka Trump has admitted that her dad did in fact offer her a key role in the Trump administration, we can add yet another entry to Trump's list of likely crimes.

Published with permission of The American Independent Foundation.