On today’s show, we get into the media’s gradually forming narrative of the Mueller Report before Thursday’s release.

We also discuss New York Democratic Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s unmatched ability to make a fool of herself again, left-wing journalists drooling over “Mayor Pete” even he doesn’t seem to understand the Constitution and another movie version of an old TV show in the works.

Listen to the show:

The Mueller Report is due to be released Thursday morning, and liberals are getting both excited and worried. In anticipation, the narrative they will push has taken form: Attorney General William Barr is still hiding the truth from the American people.

In the last week, since Barr announced he’d be investigating possible spying on the 2016 Trump campaign, the media spin has been working overtime to claim Barr is nothing more than a tool for the president. So, what are they preparing to do when the report is ultimately released? We get into it.

In a softball interview, Ocasio-Cortez said there are countless reasons obvious to her and people like her to impeach President Donald Trump. When asked to list her top three reasons, she had difficulty naming them. Unable to answer, she scrambled and came up with two ridiculous, desperate answers. The audio is hilarious, and we dissect it.

South Bend, Indiana, Mayor Pete Buttigieg is the flavor of the moment on the left. After his official campaign kick-off Sunday, MSNBC and CNN spent Monday fawning over the mayor embarrassingly so. Buttigieg also explained how he thinks Republicans are stacking the Supreme Court and using the Electoral College to subvert the will of the American people. This “brilliant man,” according to journalists, fundamentally misunderstands the United States Constitution and our founding. We have the audio and explain it all.

Hollywood is raiding the past again, this time planning a movie version of the 1970s TV show “The Six-Million Dollar Man” starring Mark Wahlberg. Only, thanks to inflation, it’s been updated to “The Six-Billion Dollar Man.” That’s one hell of a markup.

Please help spread the word about The Daily Daily Caller Podcast. Please take a minute to rate and review on iTunes, share on social media and be sure to subscribe so you never miss an episode:

The Daily Daily Caller Podcast is a daily look and mocking of the news from a conservative perspective. Hosted by Derek Hunter, it is available in audio form Monday-Thursday and will have a video option on Fridays.

Derek Hunter is a columnist and contributing editor for The Daily Caller and author of “Outrage, INC: How the Liberal Mob Ruined Science, Journalism, and Hollywood” from HarperCollins, available now. Pick Up a copy, or several copies, here. Send compliments and complaints to derek@dailycaller.com or follow him on Twitter at @derekahunter.