The North Berkeley Farmers’ Market was surprisingly bustling on Thursday afternoon, with farmers hawking petite cone cabbages, oyster mushrooms and golden beets.

Hand sanitizer and handwashing stations greeted people upon arrival. Shoppers stood on chalked blue arrows to ensure a safe distance apart. Riverdog Farm completely redid its stall’s setup, placing all the produce in bins behind its tables and requiring people to order vegetables instead of picking them out themselves. The changes brought some confusion as well as a common refrain heard around the market: “It’s OK, we’re all figuring it out right now.”

Eating in: Bay Area restaurants open for takeout and delivery during coronavirus 'stay at home' order

Some neighborhood residents looked delighted to see all the activity. They didn’t even realize the farmers’ market was still operating.

That’s understandable. Roughly a dozen farmers’ markets have closed around the Bay Area. Some, like the Downtown Palo Alto Farmers’ Market, decided to shut down on their own. In other cases, like with Jack London Square Farmers’ Market in Oakland, the landlord deemed the market a large event that needed to be canceled in the name of social distancing. The closures — coupled with the collapse of the restaurant industry — have severely affected local farmers, who are scrambling to find new ways to get their produce to customers.

But many farmers’ market operators have lobbied government officials to keep them open — and they succeeded with Monday’s Bay Area shelter-in-place mandate, which specifically named farmers’ markets as an essential service.

“People think they’re optional lifestyle choices, and they’re not,” said Christine Farren, the interim executive director at the Center for Urban Education about Sustainable Agriculture, which operates the Ferry Plaza Farmers Market. “Many people depend on farmers’ markets for their food and many farmers depend on farmers’ markets for their livelihood.”

Farmers’ markets are known in the Bay Area as not just a place to shop but to socialize, eat and enjoy the outdoors. That’s changed with the coronavirus. Under new guidelines from the California Department of Public Health, farmers’ markets must remove all seating areas, cancel events like cooking demonstrations, ban sampling and move vendors further apart. Operators say they began making those changes even before the guidelines arrived.

“We’re not creating a lingering relaxing atmosphere anymore. Get in, get your groceries and go home,” Farren said.

Farren is frustrated by what she calls a misconception that farmers’ markets are a form of luxury shopping — after all, people can use food stamps at farmers’ markets and get the value matched thanks to the statewide Market Match program. There were almost 200,000 such transactions across the state last year, according to Carle Brinkman of the Ecology Center, which operates three farmers’ markets in Berkeley.

“It will greatly impact people who are the most vulnerable if farmers’ markets don’t remain open,” she said. As part of the California Alliance of Farmers’ Markets, Brinkman is fighting to get some closed markets reopened.

Operators also argue that farmers’ markets are safer environments to shop in than grocery stores because they’re outdoors, there’s more room for social distancing and there’s a shorter supply chain, which means less handling from farm to market. They’re exploring more ways to appeal to nervous shoppers, including aggregating boxes of produce from different farmers at the market for people to quickly grab and go.

While grocery stores are packed with shoppers despite empty shelves, Farren said foot traffic is down 50% at the thrice-weekly Ferry Plaza Farmers Market — it’s been particularly hit hard because tourism is down and few people are working in downtown offices. Markets in residential neighborhoods, such as the North Berkeley market, seem to be faring better.

Yet the Ecology Center’s efforts to instill social distancing didn’t make Berkeley resident Carol Sawdey feel much safer at the Thursday farmers’ market compared with a grocery store.

“I find I’m never 6 feet from people. It’s hard,” she said, holding a paper bag of beets.

Others said it was still a more pleasant environment overall — and they have bigger reasons behind their shopping decisions.

“I want to support the people doing the best farming we can have right now, and they need to be sustained,” said Berkeley resident Lenore Thompson. “It’s what we have to do.”

As with workers in many other industries, small farmers are in a dire situation. Most of the farmers who sell at farmers’ markets don’t supply grocery stores — instead, they built their business model around selling direct to consumers and to restaurants. But most restaurants have opted to temporarily close — not to mention caterers and corporate cafeterias — so the chefs are no longer visiting farmers’ markets either.

“It’s a domino effect. Everyone is hurting,” said Aomboon Deasy of K&J Orchards in Winters, who estimated that 40% of the farmers’ markets where she usually sells have closed. “Hopefully we have enough saved up to keep production running.”

Farmers said they feel lucky the shelter-in-place directive happened now, since this period between winter and spring is a slow time of year anyway. “If this was in July, we would have so much food that I don’t know what we would do,” said Sandi McGinnis of McGinnis Ranch, whose restaurant clients have all closed.

McGinnis is continuing to plant as if everything were normal — after all, she can’t return the seeds — and opened a farm stand to serve the Monterey County community of Royal Oaks twice a week.

Warren Simmons, the order processor at Ventura County’s Brokaw Ranch, isn’t sure how to get his famous avocados and citrus to people, given that Brokaw’s biggest client — a small distributor that supplies local restaurants — isn’t buying anymore and a number of markets have closed. Making home deliveries doesn’t seem like a realistic option.

“We don’t have the infrastructure for that to make sense. We would need partners,” he said. “It’s a matter of how quickly this came upon us — relationships aren’t established at this point.”

Dirty Girl Produce, however, has already taken the leap. The Santa Cruz County farm recently began delivering boxes of produce to people in the surrounding region and is working with San Francisco Thai restaurant Nari to offer boxes for pickup — a customer could order eggplant curry with a side of vegetables to last all week. Stella Araiza, Dirty Girl’s sales manager, said she’s exploring other pickup locations in the Bay Area.

“The community at large is trying to keep eating good food, even though they’re stuck in their houses,” she said. “I wouldn’t be surprised if more farms take that direct-to-your-door approach.”

Marin Roots Farm’s Moira Kuhn has considered similar options, but she’s not sure she could pull it off fast enough. The Petaluma farm specializes in unusual greens and edible flowers, not the typical staples like carrots and cabbage people would likely want delivered every week. She fears by the time she planted and grew such vegetables, there wouldn’t be anyone left still looking for produce delivery.

“In a month and a half, we might have all this stuff we can’t sell,” she said. “You have to be very innovative in farming, whether it’s the drought or influenza or the recession or large businesses coming into compete, there are always things happening.”

Janelle Bitker is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: janelle.bitker@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @janellebitker