Rep. Mark Meadows (Getty/Chip Somodevilla)

“Don’t buy the spin” by Democrats claiming incriminating information about President Donald Trump was redacted from Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s Trump-Russia report by Attorney General William Barr, Rep. Mark Meadows (R-N.C.) warned Tuesday.

Tweeting in anticipation of the redacted report’s Thursday release, Rep. Meadows reminded Americans that Mueller and his team helped determine what would be redacted:

“Important for this week: Democrats will predictably try to seize on redactions within the Mueller report and accuse Bill Bar of hiding something. Remember the Special Counsel and his team are directly HELPING with the redaction process. Don't buy the spin.”

Indeed, on April 9, 2018, Barr testified in a House hearing that Mueller and his staff are participating in selecting redactions:

Rep. Nita Lowey (D-N.Y.): “Can you tell us who is factually accurate and will the released report include details on the obstruction issue and why, as you noted, the President is not exonerated or will that information be redacted?” AG Barr: “I've already explained the information that's going to be redacted from the report, the four categories. That is what's going to govern the redactions. And, in fact, the Special Counsel and his staff are helping us select the information in the report that falls into those four categories. “But, again, the report, I'll be in a position, as I said, within a week to release the report. People can then read the report. I have already promised the judiciary committees that I would appear as soon as they're able to schedule a hearing after the report is released. So I'm not going to discuss it any further until after the report is out.”

As CNSNews.com reported on April 9, the four types of information that will be redacted are:

Grand jury material, Classified information that would reveal sources and methods, Information that would interfere with ongoing prosecutions, and Information that intrudes on the privacy or reputation of “peripheral players.”

On Monday, Rep. Meadows predicted Democrats will “spin anything possible” from the report to continue rationalizing “a conspiracy that doesn’t exist”:

“Thursday's Mueller report should end the collusion delusion, once and for all. But we already know Democrats will do what they've done for 2 years: spin anything possible to try and prop up a conspiracy that doesn't exist. We know the bottom line. No collusion. It's over.”