You can get the iconic Hunter rain boots for 50% off right now

This is one of the biggest discounts we've seen on these cult-favorite rain boots. (Photo: Hunter)

— Recommendations are independently chosen by Reviewed’s editors. Purchases you make through our links may earn us a commission.

Hunter footwear has a big reputation in the fashion world. Known for their sleek, stylish appearance, the brand's waterproof boots are as iconic for their look as they are for their reliability during wet, sloshy weather. The only problem? They're notoriously expensive too, usually retailing for anywhere from $100 to $150 depending on the style.

Need help finding products?: Sign up for our weekly newsletter. It’s free and you can unsubscribe at any time.

For a lot of people, that might seem like an insane amount to spend on rain boots. But right now, you can grab a pair of Hunters and save almost $100, thanks to this one-day only sale happening on Woot!

For today only, there's a massive deal on three types of Hunter rain boots: the Original Tall Boots in green or black, the Original Tall Gloss Boots in black or navy, and the Original Short Boots in black. Normally, the Original Tall boots retail for $150, while the Original Shorts have a list price of $100. But they're all priced at just $58.99 during this sales event, so you could save up to 50%.

Unsure if Hunters are the real deal? Staff writer Sara Hendricks put them to the test and found that they're absolutely worth the investment. The short Hunters she tried were comfortable, easy to clean, and kept her feet dry and insulated during wet and otherwise icky weather.

A sale like this almost never happens on Hunter boots, and remarkably, there are still plenty of size and color options to choose from. But if you see something in your size, you shouldn't put this off, since Hunter boots tend to sell out on Woot! pretty fast.

Get the Hunter Women's Original Short Rain Boots on Woot! for $58.99 (Save $41)

Get the Hunter Women's Original Tall Rain Boots on Woot! for $58.99 (Save $91.01)

Get the Hunter Women's Original Tall Gloss Boot on Woot! for $58.99 (Save $91.01)

The product experts at Reviewed have all your shopping needs covered. Follow Reviewed on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram for the latest deals, reviews, and more.

Prices were accurate at the time this article was published but may change over time.

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/reviewedcom/2020/04/17/hunter-rain-boots-sale-get-iconic-footware-50-off-right-now/5153281002/