It’s one of the strangest admissions a candidate for president has ever made. But, over the weekend, Democratic presidential candidate Beto O’Rourke apologized for for writings he made as a teenager describing fantasies about running over children with a vehicle.

Here’s more:

“I’m mortified to read it now, incredibly embarrassed, but I have to take ownership of my words,” the Democratic presidential candidate said during a taping of the “Political Party Live” podcast in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. “Whatever my intention was as a teenager doesn’t matter, I have to look long and hard at my actions, at the language I have used, and I have to constantly try to do better.” His comments come after a report Friday revealed O’Rourke wrote prose when he was a teenager describing a scenario in which he would accelerate a car into a group of children while hearing them scream. The report also showed he was a secret member of a hacking group called the “Cult of the Dead Cow,” which focused on showing people how to hack Microsoft computers. “It’s not anything I’m proud of today, and I mean, that’s — that’s the long and short of it,” he said. “All I can do is my best, which is what I’m trying to do. I can’t control anything I’ve done in the past. I can only control what I do going forward and what I plan to do is give this my best.”

“One day, as I was driving home from work, I noticed two children crossing the street. They were happy, happy to be free from their troubles…. This happiness was mine by right. I had earned it in my dreams,” O’Rourke wrote.

“As I neared the young ones, I put all my weight on my right foot, keeping the accelerator pedal on the floor until I heard the crashing of the two children on the hood, and then the sharp cry of pain from one of the two. I was so fascinated for a moment, that when after I had stopped my vehicle, I just sat in a daze, sweet visions filling my head,” O’Rourke continued.

The news is perhaps not surprising given that O’Rourke supports abortions up to birth. That’s a position he defended yesterday, as videoed during a campaign stop.

Click here to sign up for pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

O’Rourke was captured on camera at a campaign event in Cleveland responding to a question about third-trimester abortions and whether or not he supports abortions up to birth.

“That should be a decision that the woman makes. I trust her,” O’Rourke says.

Not only does O’Rourke have a 100-percent pro-abortion voting record like the other Democrat presidential candidates, he also sponsored a radical pro-abortion bill that would have legalized abortions for basically any reason up to birth.

The so-called “Women’s Health Protection Act” was introduced in Congress in 2017, with dozens of Democrat sponsors, including likely presidential candidates Kamala Harris, Elizabeth Warren, Cory Booker, Kristen Gillibrand and Bernie Sanders.

Nicknamed the “Abortion Without Limits Until Birth Act” by pro-life groups, the bill would have invalidated nearly all state and federal abortion regulations, including waiting periods, informed consent requirements, bans on late-term abortions and sex-selection abortions and more.

The congressman has also failed to speak out against Nancy Pelosi and House Democrats blocking a request by Republicans to vote on a similar bill to require medical care and treatment for babies who survive abortions. That puts him on record supporting their decision to allow infanticide to continue unprosecuted.

Click here to sign up for pro-life news alerts from LifeNews.com

Here is his lengthy record supporting abortion, courtesy of Texas Right to Life.