That threatened to upend a plan by House leaders to hold a voice vote on the package, sparing most lawmakers a potentially dangerous trip back to Washington as public health officials have advised people to shelter in place and avoid large gatherings. Instead, the leaders in both parties had to summon dozens of members back to the capital — piling into cars or securing seats on near-empty red-eye flights — so that enough of them would be present in the House chamber to block Mr. Massie’s request.

Mr. Trump took to Twitter to berate the Kentucky Republican, calling him a “third rate Grandstander,” and Mr. Kerry replied that Mr. Massie “must be quarantined to prevent the spread of his massive stupidity.” That drew an appreciative retweet from the president, who said he was “Very impressed” with the Democrat’s sense of humor.

Mr. Massie’s own colleagues in both parties were even more scathing. Representative Peter T. King, Republican of New York, said on Twitter that his colleague would have blood on his hands if lawmakers became infected.

Despite the widespread disdain for Mr. Massie, his late objection — like one raised by Senate Republicans in the hours before the measure unanimously passed that chamber on Wednesday — pointed to some lingering ideological divides over the government’s role in confronting a crisis. The political backlash that followed the 2008 bailout of Wall Street and the enormous stimulus program that followed in 2009 hung over the discussions, and members of Congress are keenly aware that voters are closely watching their actions.

“They don’t want a recorded vote,” Mr. Massie told reporters of congressional leaders. “They don’t want to be on record on making the biggest mistake in history.”

In under four weeks, lawmakers have produced three substantial proposals to confront the coronavirus, agreeing to emergency government help, expansions of the social safety net and financial bailouts that would have seemed unthinkable only a few weeks ago. Mr. Trump has signed all of them.

Now that the largest of those is law, attention will turn to its effect on a battered economy, where 3.3 million filed for unemployment last week, entire industries are in peril and many experts say a package of its size can provide a few months of ballast — if that — before more help is needed. The administration now must scramble to find ways of enforcing the vast new programs, including an array of benefits for Americans and aid to nearly every industry — as well as strict oversight measures to make sure bailed-out companies do not use the help to enrich themselves at the expense of their workers.