Remember back in the day when your English teacher acted like it was criminal to use the wrong pronoun?

Guess what.

Now it IS!

Or at least it looks that way, the way British police are acting.

TRENDING: Obama AG Eric Holder giddy about 'opportunity' coronavirus presents to make 'permanent' changes

They are investigating a Catholic journalist who allegedly "misgendered" a child.

"Caroline Farrow was contacted by authorities after making an appearance on 'Good Morning Britain,' in which she engaged in a debate with a transgender activist, Susie Green, who has a trans child," reported Faithwire.

Farrow explained on Twitter:

Had a message from Guildford police tonight about my tweets following an appearance on @GMB with Susie Green and Piers Morgan. Susie Green has reported me for misgendering her daughter. — Caroline Farrow (@CF_Farrow) March 18, 2019

I have pointed out to the police that I am a Catholic journalist/commentator and it is my religious belief that a person cannot change sex. That we are in the middle of a national conversation about what it means to be male and what it means to be female. — Caroline Farrow (@CF_Farrow) March 18, 2019

The social-media commentary site Twitchy wrote she is being interviewed "under caution."

Farrow explained: "I can't sleep I am so furious. According to the police I 'misgendered' which implies that I used the wrong pronouns/nouns and this potentially constitutions a criminal offense. Let that sink in."

Commentator Piers Morgan, who had interviewed Farrow, appeared surprised, writing via Twitter, "WHAT?????"

"Oh, and if I don't go for an interview about some tweets that allegedly misgendered, I will apparently be arrested. Which is nice," Farrow continued.

And she pointed out how important pronouns are to police. But not threats. They apparently can be ignored.

"Meanwhile a group of people have terrified and harassed my family. Doxed my children, made violent and sexual threats, signed me up to porn accounts, did the same to my husband, threatened to visit here."

Police, reported Faithwire, "appear unbothered by this onslaught of cyber abuse."

Farrow posted the interview that apparently triggered concern about the criminal pronouns:

Here’s the GMB interview the police referred to. From what I understand this wasn’t illegal but some follow-up tweets were. https://t.co/suOELE7aSK — Caroline Farrow (@CF_Farrow) March 18, 2019

The report said the U.K.'s Malicious Communications Act of 1988 makes in an offense to send an indecent message, a threat or information "which is false and known or believed to be false by the sender."