Most kids’ books take years for an author and an editor and a publisher and a printer to put together.

Freeman Ng, of Alameda, figured he didn’t have years. He had a couple of days.

And that’s how long he took, start to finish, to write, illustrate, assemble and publish his forward-looking book, “The House We Sheltered In,” about a family making the best of things during the pandemic.

“This is the soap that washed the hands, again and again and again and again, that cleaned the knobs and panes and pans, of the house we sheltered in,” says the text, inspired by the old rhyme “This is the House that Jack Built.”

The tale continues in a similar way, telling of video chats with far-off friends, of food passed with grateful hands, of stories read and told and, at last, of a new dawn.

Like a lot of folks these days, Ng is making no money from his labors. He illustrated the book himself. He offered it online, for free, with instructions on how to print it and assemble the pages into a proper book. Hundreds already have.

Now Playing:

Ng, a 59-year-old former software engineer, said it was more important to get the book into as many hands as possible rather than to make money. The idea, he said, was to “address the circumstances of our time” for children. (The book is available at www.sheltering.life)

“It’s just my small contribution,” he said. “It’s nothing compared to what a doctor is doing for everyone, or what a grocery store clerk is doing for everyone.”

With its references to “grateful hands” and a life “free from harm,” the tale, Ng conceded, was perhaps more optimistic than many people were feeling.

“That’s what I was trying to do,” he said. “It’s about not just enduring. It’s about celebrating and honoring the life we have right now.”

Pandemic pet boarding: Man’s best friend — and cats, too! — can qualify for free pet boarding if their owners are hospitalized during the pandemic, a Sacramento animal welfare foundation has announced.

Grants to cover up to two weeks of kennel fees are being made available by RedRover, a 33-year-old animal welfare charity in Sacramento that helps pet owners in crisis.

Typically, the foundation provides grants to victims of domestic violence who cannot bring their pets to domestic violence shelters. Last year, said president Nicole Forsyth, the foundation gave 161 grants to women in shelters.

What will happen if tens of thousands of pet owners are hospitalized? Can a small foundation with an annual budget of $4 million help every pet-owning patient who needs it?

More Information Share with us the ‘good news’ The news these days can be sobering, even grim. There’s a lot of uncertainty and discomfort most everywhere you look. But amid the darkness, there are rays of light: young people helping older neighbors, musicians and fitness coaches offering their talents online, neighbors having outdoor dance parties (using proper social distancing). We’d like to know about examples of good news you have witnessed during this time. You can tell us your thoughts online at SFChronicle.com by using our Assignment Editor tool, or send an email (which can include a photo) with the subject line “Good News” to metro@sfchronicle.com.

Read More

“We’re going to try,” said Forsyth.

Pet owners are the lucky ones during a pandemic, she said, because the unconditional love is right there at the other end of the leash.

“Sometimes a person feels more love from a pet than from another person,” she said. “During a time of crisis, the support of a pet can make or break you.”

People seeking to apply for a pet-boarding grant can visit the foundation website (www.redrover.org).

Steve Rubenstein is a staff writer for The San Francisco Chronicle. E-mail: srubenstein@sfchronicle.com