In the history of African Americans who fought for the rights of our people, a conversation cannot go by without mentioning the great Malcolm X. May 19 is the birthday of the great civil rights leader who was killed by an assassin’s bullet. Had he survived, he would have turned 94 today.

In honor of the iconic leader’s birthday, a new short film was produced reimagining Malcolm X being interviewed in 2019 and offering his sage commentary on how much things have changed (or stayed the same) in society. It’s an interesting take on how far the fight for civil rights has come, and how much farther society needs to go to truly attain social justice in American and around the world.

“The social climate in America has been all to [sic] familiar when It comes to African American history,” wrote Todd Anthony, the star of the movie who uploaded the film to YouTube. “The voice of balance has been void to a degree but what if Malcolm X were here today to restore the imbalance? In this film “MALCOLM” directed by Will Catlett (Black Lightening, Love Is) starring Todd Anthony, Malcolm X comes back on 5/19/19 (his birthday) to discuss some of the current social issues that plague our country and to offer solutions for not only the African American culture but America as a whole!”

Aside from Anthony, who also co-wrote the short film with Catlett, the production also stars Jay D. Henderson and Demarius Mack and also features music by the late rapper Nipsey Hussle.

It would have been interesting to see what he’d have to say about President Donald Trump. Since we’ll never know, how about revisiting a couple of his best quotes:

1. If you’re not ready to die for it, take the word ‘freedom’ out of your vocabulary.

— Chicago Defender (November 28, 1962)

2. We declare our right on this earth…to be a human being, to be respected as a human being, to be given the rights of a human being in this society, on this earth, in this day, which we intend to bring into existence by any means necessary.

As Malcolm X evolved away from his past as Detroit Red, he transformed himself first, into a loyal protégé of the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, then, into a world-renowned human rights activist. He never hid behind his legend to avoid speaking of his time as a petty criminal, instead using his story to bolster the confidence of everyday men facing his same struggles. He let them know, in no uncertain terms, that they didn’t have to have a pristine past to make a difference in the present and the future.

Watch the new short film, “MALCOLM” below.

SEE ALSO:

#MalcolmXDay: 20 Quotes Relevant To The Movement Today

Happy Birthday, El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz (Malcolm X)