CLOSE

There may be fewer cars on the road as many people stay home during the coronavirus pandemic, but two vintage Volkswagon buses are bringing booze to doorsteps in one Phoenix neighborhood.

Postino Wine Cafe's Wine Wagon makes its maiden voyage Friday, delivering $15 bottles of wine within a 5-mile radius of the Arcadia restaurant.

And Tequila Corrido, a locally owned and female run tequila brand, is dropping off its products via Selena, a retrofitted Volkswagen bus from 1971. The bus will make deliveries within the greater Arcadia area, with a limit of 12 deliveries per day.

Each company's owners are looking to expand delivery operations in the coming weeks, but for now keep a look out for vintage buses blasting music and slinging booze throughout Phoenix's Arcadia neighborhood.

MORE THINGS TO DO: For restaurant reviews, travel tips, concert picks and more, subscribe to azcentral.com.

Postino launches a Wine Wagon

Brent Karlicek is the beverage director for Upward Projects, the local hospitality company that owns Postino. He also gets the temporary title of Wine Wagon driver.

"Fundamentally what we aim to do is to make people feel good," he says. "So the Wine Wagon came out of that desire."

The wagon will deliver its first bottles on April 17 and weave its way through Arcadia throughout the weekend. Then, the goal is to visit different neighborhoods each weekend serving customers throughout Arizona.

"We are here to serve our communities," Karlicek says, "and our communities have been telling us they need wine."

A friend volunteered his VW bus when he heard of the need for a wine wagon, and a second bus may join the fleet soon, Karlicek says. He, for one, can't wait to get out and about driving the bus and delivering wine.

"Something keeping us all going right now is seeing our regulars through the takeout windows," Karlicek says. "But being able to get out in the community is really exciting."

The Wine Wagon will deliver bottles of a range of white, red, rose and sparkling rose options each for $15. Find a full menu in the online order form.

MORE: This metro Phoenix restaurant is selling margaritas from a drive-thru

Tequila Corrido delivers shots on wheels

Tequila Corrido's VW bus made its first delivery Tuesday, April 7 and is currently delivering tequila shots, margaritas and full bottles of tequila to Arcadia doorsteps every Tuesday and Friday.

The brand partnered with CRUjiente Tacos, one of the first restaurants to carry their tequila, to collect orders and serve chips and salsa as well.

"We are kind of bringing joy along with us," co-founder Sarah Foote says. "Selena really is a showstopper. People smile and wave at us as we are driving down the street."

And so far, the three days of deliveries that Foote and her business partner Holly Simon have made have been a hit, she says.

"We pull up and we are playing the tequila song, everyone's laughing, taking videos, it's an experience," Foote says.

The team is currently delivering to Arcadia but is working on ways to spread the experience further across the Valley, dependent partially on the range of the bus. Recently renovated, Selena is getting much more use than normal, and the 1971 bus with a four speed engine and no power steering is working hard.

"But where there is demand for tequila, we want to provide it," Foote says.

Tequila Corrido's menu:

2 oz shot - $15

16 oz Premier CRU Margarita (premixed, serves 2-4) - $35

Bottle - $55

How to order a delivery bus

Postino's delivery system is set up online and through its Arcadia location. Customers within 5 miles of the restaurant can fill out an online form, which includes a menu of available wines, and request delivery. Then, staff at the Arcadia location call to take payment over the phone. There are no cash payments accepted.

Deliveries will be made Friday, Saturday and Sunday from 3 to 7 p.m. Listen for songs by the Beastie Boys announcing its time for wine.

Details: Postino, 3939 E. Campbell Avenue, Phoenix. Order online at upwardupdates.com/wine-wagon.

For those looking for tequila, the Corrido bus takes to the streets on Tuesdays and Fridays from 5 to 6:30 p.m. Orders should be made by calling CRUjiente Tacos by 4 p.m. for same-day delivery.

Next, listen for the song "Tequila" announcing the bus' arrival.

Details: CRUjiente Tacos, 3961 E. Camelback Road, Phoenix. Call for delivery at 602-687-7777.

Reach the reporter at tirion.morris@arizonarepublic.com. Follow her on Twitter at @tirionmorris, on Facebook at Tirion Rose and on Instagram at tirionrose.

Support local journalism and subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/entertainment/dining/wine/2020/04/17/phoenix-restaurants-postino-tequila-corrido-alcohol-delivery/5148911002/