Nearly 70 House Democrats on Monday formally requested that the chamber change its rules to allow lawmakers to vote remotely during national emergencies like the coronavirus pandemic.

House members, most of whom are currently in their districts across the nation, are increasingly fearful for their safety if they have to travel back to Washington, D.C., and congregate in large groups to vote on the next economic stimulus package.

Lawmakers' fears are increasing by the day as three members of Congress have tested positive for the coronavirus, while more than a dozen others are self-quarantining after being exposed to their infected colleagues.

ADVERTISEMENT

In a letter led by Reps. Eric Swalwell Eric Michael SwalwellKey House chairman cautions against remote voting, suggests other options amid coronavirus outbreak House Democrats plead with key committee chairman to allow remote voting amid coronavirus pandemic Congress tiptoes toward remote voting MORE (D-Calif.) and Katie Porter (D-Calif.), a total of 67 Democratic lawmakers asked House Rules Committee Chairman Jim McGovern (D-Mass.) to temporarily change the lower chamber's rules to enable remote voting.

Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiLady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Trump criticizes Pelosi over stalemate on small business loan funds MORE (D-Calif.) last week tasked McGovern with issuing a report on House rules regarding voting. McGovern has invited fellow lawmakers to submit comments.

Democrats — including other House committee leaders such as Oversight and Reform Committee Chairwoman Carolyn Maloney Carolyn Bosher MaloneyHillicon Valley: House Dems push for B in state election funds | Amazon suspends over 6,000 sellers for price gouging | Google says 18M malicious coronavirus emails sent daily House Democrats push hard for mail-in voting funds NY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus MORE (N.Y.), Judiciary Committee Chairman Jerrold Nadler Jerrold (Jerry) Lewis NadlerNY, NJ lawmakers call for more aid to help fight coronavirus House Judiciary Committee postpones hearing with Barr amid coronavirus outbreak House Democrats plead with key committee chairman to allow remote voting amid coronavirus pandemic MORE (N.Y.) and Budget Committee Chairman John Yarmuth John Allen YarmuthHouse Democrats plead with key committee chairman to allow remote voting amid coronavirus pandemic Kentucky Democrat: House lawmakers will not vote remotely during outbreak Dem Congressman: Coronavirus stimulus should be bigger than 2008 MORE (Ky.) — who signed on to the letter argued that a remote voting system would ensure that lawmakers don't potentially expose each other to the coronavirus and that those in quarantine could still cast votes.

"Unfortunately, during such circumstances, requiring members to vote in person may pose public health risks or even be physically impossible for persons under quarantine. We need to provide a mechanism through which Congress can act during times of crisis without having to assemble in one place," the lawmakers wrote.

Some lawmakers, including House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyMcCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Freedom Caucus chair calls for GOP to reject additional funds for state, local governments Top Republican voices skepticism of rule change to allow remote voting MORE (R-Calif.), have expressed skepticism about remote voting and how it would work in practice. McCarthy last week told fellow House Republicans on a conference call that issues like parliamentary motions would not necessarily be worked out so easily if done remotely.

ADVERTISEMENT

There's also concern that establishing an internet-based remote voting system could face security threats and potential legal challenges to bills passed under such a process. It would likely also take time to build a remote voting system when lawmakers are under pressure to move quickly to pass legislation in response to the pandemic.

But Swalwell, in the letter, pointed to discussions he's had with legal experts arguing that a remote voting system would pass muster.

The letter cited Erwin Chemerinsky, dean of the University of California at Berkeley School of Law, pointing to the Constitution stating that "each House may determine the rules of its proceedings" and Harvard law professor Laurence Tribe stating that the Constitution "needn’t and shouldn’t be construed to preclude virtual presence any more than it had to be constituted to treat air travel or indeed email as something other than interstate commerce or electronic surveillance as less than a fourth amendment search and seizure.”

Congressional leaders are still negotiating a third economic relief package despite marathon discussions over the weekend. The legislation is expected to pass the Senate before coming to the House.

Without a remote voting system in place, House leaders have limited options without forcing all members to travel back to Washington.

The House can pass legislation by unanimous consent, which requires only one lawmaker to preside over proceedings and a handful of staff on hand. But that process requires the approval of every single House member, meaning that one lawmaker can hold up passage of a bill if they are in the chamber to object.

That happened last week when the House passed changes to the second economic stimulus bill by unanimous consent. Rep. Louie Gohmert Louis (Louie) Buller GohmertTop conservatives pen letter to Trump with concerns on fourth coronavirus relief bill Lysol, disinfecting wipes and face masks mark coronavirus vote in House The Hill's 12:30 Report: What we know about T stimulus deal MORE (R-Texas) initially objected to its passage before conversations with GOP leaders and President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE.

The Senate, which is still in session, has been lengthening the time allotted for roll call votes to help reduce the number of people in the chamber at a time. But that strategy has had mixed results, as some senators continue to congregate in the chamber during votes.

So far, three members of Congress have tested positive for the coronavirus: Reps. Mario Diaz-Balart Mario Rafael Diaz-BalartFlorida Republican becomes sixth member of Congress to test positive for coronavirus Rep. McAdams now 'virus-free' after tough battle with coronavirus Bottom Line MORE (R-Fla.) and Ben McAdams (D-Utah), and Sen. Rand Paul Randal (Rand) Howard PaulTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Democrats try to force McConnell's hand on coronavirus aid 13 things to know about coronavirus for today MORE (R-Ky.).

Paul, who is currently asymptomatic, had been proceeding with his usual activities in the Capitol complex until receiving his results Sunday morning.