California Assembly Speaker Anthony Rendon (D) on Tuesday shared a fiery rebuke of the Trump administration that he sent to Vice President Pence.

Rendon was responding to a letter from the vice president wishing California a “successful legislative session” and touting the administration’s embrace of federalism.

ADVERTISEMENT

“I would have to say you and the President have already done quite a bit to help us with that. Thanks to your policies, voters in California added five Democrats to the Assembly in the last election. In addition, one Republican has decided to jump to the Democratic Party, citing the President’s extreme positions. We now have a three-quarters majority – plus one,” Rendon wrote.

President Trump Donald John TrumpWuhan lab denies claims of coronavirus origination Banks say they ran out of PPP funding 'within minutes' Trump defends testing capabilities, blasts critics during WH briefing MORE has long seen California as a bastion of liberalism and a chief opponent of his administration’s agenda. He has battled with the state government and Gov. Gavin Newsom (D) on an array of issues, including health care, climate policy, funding to fight forest fires and immigration.

State Attorney General Xavier Becerra Xavier BecerraOvernight Energy: EPA declines to toughen air quality standards | Trump to rent 27M barrels of storage space to oil companies | States, green groups sue Trump over efficiency rollback 13 states, green groups sue Trump administration over energy efficiency rollback Group of pastors sue California officials for 'criminalizing' church attendance MORE (D) has also been a vocal opponent of the president, with his office filing over 40 lawsuits against the White House since Trump took office.

Becerra has fought Trump on high-profile issues including the president’s ban on travel from several Muslim-majority countries, his attempts to end the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, his administration’s opposition to “sanctuary” policies, his family separation policy at the border and more. The federal government has responded in kind with a litany of suits of its own.

“Although you probably know this, I would add that your Administration has been largely unsuccessful in its court attempts to take away our rights as a state, including our right to serve immigrants and refugees of all nations,” Rendon wrote.

The California Democrat also hammered the Trump administration for its lack of diversity in senior posts, referring to a list of federal liaisons Pence had sent.

“Thanks for the list of federal liaisons. If you are interested in diversifying the list beyond its current makeup – roughly 75 percent male and between two-thirds and 95 percent white – be sure to look to California. Our success is built on diversity,” Rendon said.