Here's how much money you're set to receive under the $2 trillion aid package

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, third from left, and White House Legislative Affairs Director Eric Ueland, left, walk to a meeting with Senate Minority Leader Sen. Chuck Schumer of N.Y. in his office on Capitol Hill, Monday, March 23, 2020, in Washington. less Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, third from left, and White House Legislative Affairs Director Eric Ueland, left, walk to a meeting with Senate Minority Leader Sen. Chuck Schumer of N.Y. in his office on ... more Photo: Andrew Harnik / Associated Press Photo: Andrew Harnik / Associated Press Image 1 of / 44 Caption Close Here's how much money you're set to receive under the $2 trillion aid package 1 / 44 Back to Gallery

For more coverage, visit our complete coronavirus section here.

Most Americans will be receiving checks from the federal government after President Donald Trump and Congress agreed to a $2 trillion coronavirus relief deal Wednesday.

The stimulus is unprecedented in size, and politicians hope it will prevent the country from descending into a recession if a protracted fight against COVID-19 grinds the economy to a halt.

So what does it mean for you? Although the final legislative language is still being hammered out, here is what was proposed in regards to stimulus checks:

— Individual taxpayers with incomes up to $75,000 will receive a one-time $1,200 direct payment. If you make more than $99,000, you will get nothing. If you make between that range, you'll get less than $1,200, but the exact number has not been confirmed yet. An earlier version of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act stipulated $5 would be subtracted from the $1,200 for every additional $100 in income.

— For couples, everything doubles. Combined incomes of up to $150,000 will receive $2,400; the cap is a combined income of $198,000.

— Families that qualified for the one-time payment will also receive an additional $500 per child.

— Annual income is based on your 2018 tax returns. If you did not file a tax return in 2018, you must file the 2019 return before qualifying for the stimulus check.

— If you're on unemployment, the bill increased unemployment insurance by $600 per week for four months (this is on top of what individual states pay out for unemployment). It has also been expanded to include freelance and gig economy workers.

— Although Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin spoke of a desire to send checks regularly throughout the coronavirus pandemic, this ultimately didn't make it into the final bill. If Congress wants to send more than one stimulus check, it will have to separately authorize another payout.

— Individuals who are retired or on Social Security still qualify for checks. "In such cases, the government would access their data through the Social Security Administration to determine their rebate," Fortune reports. If you received an SSA-1099 form, you'll receive a stimulus check the same way you receive your Social Security payments. However, individuals whose total income exceeds the limits listed above will receive nothing.

As to when checks will arrive, that's still very much up in the air. The last time Americans got stimulus checks — in 2008 under George W. Bush — it took about three months for checks to arrive. Theoretically, Americans should get them faster this time, provided they're signed up with the IRS for direct deposit into their bank accounts (like how you get tax refunds).

Nonetheless, it seems like the earliest estimates for seeing that cash is around mid-April.

Katie Dowd is a senior digital editor with SFGATE. Email her: katie.dowd@sfgate.com