CLOSE

He decreed that air passengers arriving from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut must self-quarantine for 14 days or face a fine.

Hours before new quarantine requirements for travelers from the New York area — announced by Gov. Doug Ducey on Tuesday — were set to take effect at 12:01 a.m. April 9, Phoenix aviation officials were still unclear on how to implement them.

The Federal Aviation Administration advises that state and local officials who want to implement travel restrictions related to the new coronavirus pandemic give airports and airlines at least two days' notice.

But the airport and airlines hadn't been consulted prior to Ducey's announcement, city officials told The Arizona Republic, and received notice of the order only after it had been issued.

"These types of directives are typically preapproved, or at least coordinated, with the FAA and the airport before a decision is made," said Annie DeGraw, a spokeswoman for Phoenix Mayor Kate Gallego's office. "This coordination has not yet taken place."

MORE THINGS TO DO: For restaurant reviews, travel tips, concert picks and more, subscribe to azcentral.com.

A spokesperson for Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport referred all questions to the Arizona Department of Health Services.

DHS told The Republic that it is working with Sky Harbor and would post guidance on its website when it is completed.

What Ducey's travel order says

Ducey's order requires air passengers arriving from New York, New Jersey and Connecticut to quarantine themselves for 14 days upon entering Arizona.

That applies whether a flight originated in one of those states or whether a passenger connected through a New York-area airport, according to Ducey spokesman Patrick Ptak. Violators face fines of up to $2,500.

The order requires DHS to implement the process of notifying passengers, and requires aviation and airport authorities to help the department ensure the "purposes of this order are fulfilled."

But it's unclear how the order will be enforced. Federal law restricts Sky Harbor from using its funds for anything but activities directly related to aviation and the transport of passengers.

"The airport recently received guidance from the FAA stating that utilizing airport employees for these types of quarantine efforts is generally not considered appropriate," DeGraw said.

Asked whether the governor's office had provided advance notice of the directive to aviation officials, Ptak said: "We were in immediate contact with the airport, and the order provides 24 hours to allow time to coordinate."

As of late Wednesday afternoon, hours before the directive was set to take effect, DHS said it was still working with the airport on how to implement it.

March 28 guidelines from the FAA recommended that state and local governments "coordinate no less than 48 hours before implementation of the quarantine or restriction procedures" with "all air transportation stakeholders that operate in your jurisdiction."

Specifically, it stated that those conversations should include "airlines, airports, federal agency partners and other aviation businesses such as Fixed Base Operators and charter operators."

How many people may have to quarantine?

It is unclear how many passengers the order will affect. It exempts airline personnel, military personnel and health care workers helping in the response to COVID-19.

As of Wednesday, it appeared only JetBlue and Southwest Airlines were still offering nonstop flights between Phoenix and New York City airports.

Delta, American, United and Frontier airlines have suspended nonstop flights from Sky Harbor to the New York area. Tucson International Airport has no nonstop flights to the area.

Southwest and American airlines have been sending travelers emails reminding them to check travel restrictions at their destinations.

"Local officials and/or airport authorities execute any specifics of the various orders upon arrival, so we direct you to those resources for more specifics," a spokesperson for Southwest said when contacted by email.

You can connect with Arizona Republic Consumer Travel Reporter Melissa Yeager at melissa.yeager@azcentral.com. You can also follow her on Twitter and Instagram.

Support local journalism like this story by subscribing today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/travel/airlines/2020/04/08/ducey-orders-new-york-area-travelers-quarantine-arizona-unclear-how-that-will-be-enforced/2967181001/