CLOSE

The Navajo Police Department confirmed that nine employees have tested positive for COVID-19 as of Wednesday.

That's almost twice as many as Tuesday, when the department announced that five employees, including four officers, had tested positive for the virus.

The employees are currently in self-isolation and are monitoring their symptoms, according to a press release from the department. The police building in Chinle will be thoroughly cleaned as a precautionary measure.

"The support staff with the Chinle district will be placed on administrative leave during the disinfection and sanitization process," police department Chief Phillip Francisco said in the release. "Because of our responsibilities to the community, we will continue to be vigilant and committed to answering calls of service while keeping the safety of the public a high priority.”

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coronavirus coverage relating to public safety free of charge. Support The Republic by subscribing to azcentral.com.

The department is seeking the assistance of laboratories to test employees, especially as the department has a shortage of personal protective equipment.

"We will continue to support our staff who are in self-quarantine. Our officers and staff remain optimistic and motivated to continue their service to the people. We continue to ask for the public’s assistance by adhering to the emergency orders in place to reduce the growth and spread of this disease,” Francisco said in the statement.

The Navajo Nation has been hard-hit by the new coronavirus. It announced Wednesday evening it had 921 identified cases, with 38 confirmed deaths. Of the 921 cases, 598 involve residents on tribal land in Arizona counties. The Navajo Nation includes parts of Arizona, New Mexico and Utah.

The police department enforced the tribe's first 57-hour curfew last weekend. They set up checkpoints and issued more than 170 citations to anyone who violated the curfew.

Navajo Nation Police Department sets up road blocks on the Navajo Nation to inform the public about the curfew from 8 p.m. to 5 a.m. as well as hand out pamphlets about COVID-19. (Photo: Courtesy of Office of the Navajo Nation President and Vice President)

“Our employee’s health and wellbeing is a priority and as essential employees working in the field of public safety, we are not immune from the possibility of having one of our law enforcement family contract the virus," Francisco said in a statement Tuesday.

"As the numbers of positive cases increase across the Navajo Nation, so does our risk of being exposed," he continued.

According to Francisco, the department has about 350 employees in total, 205 of whom are commissioned officers.

The names and roles of the department's employees would not be released to protect their privacy, the department initially said.

Reporter Chelsea Curtis contributed to this story.

Reach the reporter Connor Van Ligten at Connor.VanLigten@arizonarepublic.com or on Twitter @Connor_VL.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-health/2020/04/15/navajo-police-department-confirms-9-employees-have-covid-19/5142973002/