You wouldn’t have to go back into the archives of my old (now defunct) radio program to conclude that Senator Lindsey Graham was never one of my favorites. Perennially infatuated with being what many conservatives dub a RINO (Republican In Name Only), Graham seemed to relish the role of being unpredictable and unreliable when the right needed him most. Whether it was a hope to attain media admiration for his planned presidential run, or an envious appreciation of John McCain’s maverick status, Graham was a thorn in conservatives’ sides for years.

Something changed in Graham about halfway through President Trump’s term in office, however, and the Senator from South Carolina has found himself garnering headlines for his rigid defense of the Commander-in-Chief against his critics. Whether it was calling the impeachment inquiry a “bunch of B.S.” or his, let’s be honest, heroic defense of Brett Kavanaugh during the Democrats’ despicable attempt to destroy his character for the sake of politics, Graham has been earning the appreciation of the right as much as he’s earning the rage of the left and media (but I repeat myself).

Still, I’m hopeful that regardless of one’s feelings about Senator Lindsey Graham, all Americans will find his recent remarks about our long-term governmental response to coronavirus appropriate and proper. That is, not only laying blame at the feet of whom it belongs, but taking meaningful action to punish the culprit:

“The first thing I want to do is get the United States Senate on the record where we, we don’t blame Trump, we blame China. The Chinese government is responsible for 16,000 American deaths and 17 million Americans being unemployed. It’s the Chinese government and the way they behave that led to this pandemic. This is the third one to come out of China.



I want to make our response to this so overwhelming that China will change its behavior. I want to get the medical supply chain back into the United States. I want to stop canceling some debt that we owe to China because they should be paying us, not us paying China. So I think you will see a bipartisan push back against China to punish them so severely to deter them in the future.”

The debate over how quickly, how well, and how effectively the United States responded to this pandemic is one that we should have – not for the sake of politics but for the sake of preparing better for the future. The political fallout will be whatever it will be. As I’ve said before, at this point I don’t care what it is. What I care about is getting through the crisis now, given our current situation, and then hashing out the shoulda, coulda, wouldas later.

But regardless of whether this benefits Democrats or Republicans domestically, I am begging Americans of all political stripes to agree with Senator Graham. This catastrophe was the fault of the communist Chinese. Remarkably, liberal commentator Bill Maher did the best job of anyone I’ve seen in pointing this out (though with a bit more colorful terminology than I would have preferred). To not take severe punitive, retributory action towards the dishonest regime that infected the world with a virus they lied about, is absolutely unacceptable. It can’t happen.

China must pay, and must pay dearly for what they have done. Senator Josh Hawley has now introduced a bill to start us down that path. We can’t start walking it fast enough.