Just one day after Democratic presidential candidate Beto O’Rourke said he supported abortions up to birth, the former Texas Congressman said again that he supports unlimited abortions.

But this time, O’Rourke added that he supports abortions up to birth funded at taxpayer expense under universal government-run healthcare.

Asked about his comments regarding third-trimester abortions during a campaign stop in Cleveland, here’s what O’Rourke said:

“Listen I think those decisions are best left to a woman and her doctor. I know better than to assume anything about a woman’s decisions — an incredibly difficult decision when it comes to her reproductive rights. Roe vs. Wade, though it is being tested unlike any other time, is still the law of the land and must be upheld. And we must ensure when we are talking about universal healthcare, we are also talking about women’s healthcare.”

SIGN THE PETITION: Stop Infanticide! Stop Abortions Up to Birth!

Not only does O’Rourke have a 100-percent pro-abortion voting record like the other Democrat presidential candidates, he also sponsored a radical pro-abortion bill that would have legalized abortions for basically any reason up to birth.

The so-called “Women’s Health Protection Act” was introduced in Congress in 2017, with dozens of Democrat sponsors, including likely presidential candidates Kamala Harris, Elizabeth Warren, Cory Booker, Kristen Gillibrand and Bernie Sanders.

Nicknamed the “Abortion Without Limits Until Birth Act” by pro-life groups, the bill would have invalidated nearly all state and federal abortion regulations, including waiting periods, informed consent requirements, bans on late-term abortions and sex-selection abortions and more.

The congressman has also failed to speak out against Nancy Pelosi and House Democrats blocking a request by Republicans to vote on a similar bill to require medical care and treatment for babies who survive abortions. That puts him on record supporting their decision to allow infanticide to continue unprosecuted.

Here is his lengthy record supporting abortion, courtesy of Texas Right to Life.