01:29 ‘Raining Inside of the Living Room’: Chattanooga Reporter Shares Story of Home Destroyed in Storm As the Easter Sunday storms moved through Tennessee, two Chattanooga TV reporters experienced the damage firsthand when the storm destroyed their home.

At a Glance An area of low pressure moved across the South and East.

Damaging winds, hail and tornadoes were reported. A low pressure system tracked across the South and East bringing severe thunderstorms with tornadoes, damaging winds and hail.

Friday, April 26

Small hail and gusty winds were reported across eastern Virginia with these thunderstorms. Numerous trees were blown down by gusty winds early Friday afternoon in Lahore, Virginia.

Hail as large as one-inch in diameter was reported in Willington, Connecticut, mid-afternoon.

Hail up to ping pong ball size was reported near Sunbury, North Carolina midday Friday.

Thursday, April 25

An EF3 tornado tore through parts of Ruston, Louisiana, including the Louisiana Tech University campus, early Thursday morning.

Also early Thursday, a resident was trapped in their home due to a fallen tree near Marion, Louisiana, from an EF1 tornado. A few homes were damaged, and more than 100 trees were downed near Beekman, Louisiana, where a tornado may have touched down.

A possible tornado was also reported near Midway, Louisiana, where trees and power lines were downed early Thursday.

Thursday afternoon, a wind gust of 70 mph was reported by a fleet-boat captain on the Mississippi River near Donaldsonville, Louisiana, during a severe thunderstorm.

Two tornadoes have been confirmed so far in Indiana from storms that rolled through on Thursday.

Wednesday, April 24

An EF2 tornado damaged multiple buildings in San Augustine, Texas, late Wednesday.

Photos and video from Bryan/College Station, Texas, showed a brief tornado touchdown near Texas A&M University late Wednesday afternoon. At least four structures were damaged. There were unconfirmed reports of a possible injury in this area.

A funnel cloud was sighted near George West, Texas, which is located about 55 miles northwest of Corpus Christi, early Wednesday evening. Power poles were snapped just west of town, indicating the possibility of a tornado touchdown.

Tuesday, April 23

Thunderstorms pounded the Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex late Tuesday night. At least three people were killed when their car was swept off the road early Wednesday morning in Erath County, Texas.

Flash flooding prompted water rescues in the suburb of Carrollton, and a wind gust of 63 mph was clocked at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport.