CLOSE With an increased need and less help, both because of the new coronavirus pandemic, United Food Bank volunteers prepare emergency food bags. Arizona Republic

Wendy Bader was supposed to start a part-time job two weeks ago and had an interview scheduled for a full-time position.

But all that's on hold now.

Instead, she's standing in a circle at safe, socially distant intervals with a dozen other people, getting instructions on how she will spend the next few hours.

Bader, who lives in Gilbert, is about to become one of the key links in America's food chain, one that will help make the difference for needy families who otherwise might go hungry.

In a few minutes, she will be filling plastic bags with canned vegetables, meat and peanut butter at a United Food Bank warehouse in Mesa. The bags will then be delivered to 220 food pantries and agencies across the Phoenix metro area to distribute to families in need.

Bader has been a longtime donor to the food bank, but when the COVID-19 crisis erupted, she knew she had to do more.

"In 2008, I lost my job," she says. "I've lived that. I know what kind of need is out there."

She's been volunteering for about a month.

"After all that's happened, I thought what can I do, and I jumped at the opportunity,"

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Other volunteers share similar stories of wanting to feel like they are doing something instead of just sitting at home.

Jan Edwards had been alternating volunteer stints between Luke Air Force Base and United, but when she was no longer needed at Luke, she decided to spend both days at the food bank.

"I just feel the need to give back," she says.

For Bruce Forstrom, a retired journeyman glazier and snowbird from Minnesota, there was no other option for him and his wife than to volunteer.

"You can't sit in the camper and look at each other all day," he says. "With this, you get that really good feeling because you're working with really good people — we're all here for the same reasons — and doing something for somebody who needs it."

And even though Alex Toubman of Scottsdale is supposed to be working from home, she was spending the morning volunteering with her boss's blessing.

"Right now, especially with work being slow, it's good to get out and do something nice for the community," she says.

On this day, the volunteers' goal is to fill 1,200 emergency food bags. But before the volunteers can start, a food bank employee holds a digital thermometer to their temples to make sure no one has a fever. They are then pointed to a hand-washing station and issued face masks and gloves.

These days, the agency relies on volunteers like Bader, Edwards, Forstrom and Taubman even more so than usual. Many of the corporate volunteer teams have suspended their contributions while employees have been laid off, furloughed or urged to work from home, said Tyson Nansel, communications coordinator for United Food Bank.

At the same time, the demands on resources are even greater.

In February, before the state began lockdowns, about 550 families a week showed up at United Food Bank each Friday, when food boxes are distributed to the public.

This week, the agency is expecting more than quadruple that number. In fact, the demand is so great that the agency could no longer safely handle the parking and traffic problems, so it has moved distribution to the Mesa Convention Center in downtown Mesa.

The system now allows recipients to stay in their cars, pop their trunk lids, and have boxes placed inside by volunteers and members of the Arizona National Guard.

Bader has worked the Friday distributions for the last three weeks, and says it's especially gratifying to be able to come in direct contact with the people she's helping,

"Being face to face with the actual people, before we had to wear masks, anyway, is really rewarding," she says.

"Nobody wants to be there. Nobody wants to wait hours in line for food, but they're grateful," she says.

"You see women driving up with their kids in the back seat, and it's sad knowing what's probably going on in their lives, trying to put food on the table."

But despite the heartbreak, it's empowering to be able to do something, she says.

"Just to know the impact, as someone who's been on the other end, makes it worth it."

If you'd like to volunteer at United Food Bank

Go to unitedfoodbank.org or click here. If you need immediate assistance, click here for information about Friday food distributions. Distributions run from 8 a.m. to noon at the Mesa Convention Center, 263 N. Center St.

John D'Anna is a reporter on The Arizona Republic/azcentral.com storytelling team. Reach him at john.danna@arizonarepublic.com and follow him on Twitter @azgreenday.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/mesa/2020/04/16/food-bank-volunteers-put-themselves-on-front-line-between-virus-hunger/5139380002/