Trump wishes his wall was being built. It isn't.

Trump is pretending that video of a fence being repaired from 5 months ago is evidence of his "wall" being built right now. The lie is the latest humiliation for Trump, who has been repeatedly denied the ability to waste billions in tax dollars on the racist vanity project.

Trump posted video of the fence repair with the caption, "We have just built this powerful Wall in New Mexico. Completed on January 30, 2019 – 47 days ahead of schedule! Many miles more now under construction!"

In a subsequent, lying, all-caps tweet he added, "THE WALL IS UNDER CONSTRUCTION RIGHT NOW!"

Advertisement Loading...

The video is footage of a repair procedure from Sept. 18, 2018. And it isn't "the wall."

"It's a replacement project," Mike Petersen, a public affairs director for the Army Corps of Engineers, told Task & Purpose.

The footage is from the Santa Theresa Project Border Wall Replacement Project, which is an effort to upgrade an existing 20-mile stretch of pre-existing vehicle barriers.

Not a single solitary mile of new border wall has been built since Trump took office. That's a fact that continues to frustrate him and a prime example of his political impotence.

His attempt to get American taxpayers to pony up billions for the wall, after he promised for years that Mexico would "pay for it," led to him shutting down the government.

Americans revolted at the unnecessary event and the hardship it created for thousands of federal workers.

Speaker Nancy Pelosi forced Trump to reopen the government and he eventually had to sign legislation that funded the government and avoided a shutdown without wasting money on the wall.

Trump has now been reduced to declaring a phony "national emergency" to waste existing government funds on the wall, a tactic that prompted immediate legal challenges from multiple states.

Based on tweets like the fraudulent one touting wall construction and signs at his unhinged rallies that now proclaim "finish the wall," the Trump tactic now appears to be a concerted attempt to claim the wall is in progress.

Like nearly everything else Trump has said and done, it is a lie.

There's no wall being built, no wall to be finished, and no wall "under construction."

The only "wall" being built is the wall of lies and deception surrounding Trump's presidency.

Published with permission of The American Independent Foundation.