NY Post may be compensated and/or receive an affiliate commission if you buy through our links.

After you’ve polished up on our at-home manicure tips from nail experts, it’s time to put your mani know-how into practice. From gels to dips, here are the best nail kits worth taking for a test drive during quarantine.

Dip powder nail kits

Say bonjour to DipWell’s French Set Starter Kit, which comes with everything you need for a classic pink-and-white set of nails. Très chic!

Dip Nail French Set Starter Kit, $45 at DipWell

Modelones’ Dipping Powder Starter Kit includes six color powders in neutral shades of tan and pink, along with two glittery options — and (like all dip-nail kits) doesn’t require a UV or LED lamp.

Modelones Dipping Powder Starter Kit, $40 at Amazon

If deeper colors are more your speed, then pick DDIGEjin’s Dipping Powder Kit. The eye-popping palette of purples, blues and black makes a bold statement, but this simple four-step dipping system is ideal for nail newbies.

DDIGEjin Dipping Powder kit, $19 at Amazon

Calling all tough girls and guys: Mefa says its Dipping Powder Kit uses a special formula to give manis long-lasting and chip-free resistance.

Mefa Dipping Starter Kit, $50 at Amazon

Gel nail kits

Red Carpet Manicure’s Pro 45 Starter Kit is a glamorous nail salon in a box. This system leaves nails looking shiny for weeks on end and comes with a LED light, nail primer, base coat, top coat, nail and cuticle oil, cleanser, polish remover and a gel polish in a striking shade of red.

Red Carpet Manicure Pro 45 Starter Kit, $160 at Amazon

Spring into the season with AB Gel’s eight-piece nail kit. With a selection of pretty pastel polishes, all you have to add is an LED light.

AB Gel Starter Kit, $17 at Amazon

Le Mini Macaron’s Rose-Creme Gel Manicure Kit includes the brand’s best-selling 3x Shine Top Coat — known for giving manis an extra brilliant shine and chip-free, lasting coverage. The bundle also includes one bottle of gel polish, a cuticle stick, a mini nail file, 10 remover wraps and an LED lamp (which can also be used for at-home pedicures).

Rose-Creme Gel Manicure kit & 3x Shine Topcoat Bundle, $40 at Le Mini Macaron

Attention matte nail fans: Homost’s Matte Gel Polish Set is the kit for you. Pick from a variety of colors, ranging from petal pink to sultry merlot, all of which can be applied in four simple steps.

Homost Matte Gel Nail Polish Starter Kit, $17 at Amazon

Shelloloh’s manicure bundle offers the most bang for your buck. Complete with 10 gel polishes, an LED light, top and base coats, nail-art decorations and a handful of nail tools, this kit has something for everyone.

Shelloloh Gel Nail Polish Kit, $38 at Amazon

Polish nail kits

For old-school lacquer lovers, this Deborah Lippmann spring sampler includes six mini polishes in sheer, candy-colored and extra-shimmery colors.

Deborah Lippmann Beyond The Sea Gel Lab Pro Set, $36 at Sephora

Christian Louboutin’s Loubitag Set delivers luxurious, ultra-pigmented and long-lasting color to nails. Inside the beautiful packaging, the set contains two bottles of Louboutin’s iconic stiletto-shaped nail lacquers in vibrant, eye-catching colors.

Christian Louboutin Loubitag Nail Set, $60 at Saks Fifth Avenue

Nails Inc.’s Naked in Neon Set offers plenty of neon twists — plus a perfect shade of nude.

Nails Inc. Naked in Neon Nail Polish Set, $22 at Sephora

Nail art kits

Born Pretty’s Blossom Watercolor Kit invites you to turn your nails into works of art. This easy-to-use seven-piece package gives nails a marbled watercolor effect and is suitable for UV gels, acrylics and naturals.

Born Pretty Blossom Watercolor Nail Polish Manicure Kit, $19 at Amazon

Young Nails’ Caption Foil Freak Rainbow Sky Kit promises a flashy, metallic effect. With an easy three-step application, why not let your freak flag fly?

Young Nails Caption Foil Freak Rainbow Sky Kit, $15 at Ulta

Create your own custom designs with Migi’s patented nail-art pens. The dual-tipped implements feature a nail brush on one end for base colors, and a novel pen tip on the flip side for painting original creations.

Migi Nail Art Pens, $25 (set of 8) at Amazon