This is Donald Trump’s election to lose. I’ve written that countless times and it’s worth repeating. The incumbent president, who up until 30 days ago had a roaring economy, good jobs numbers, and a very good chance of re-election, faced a not-so-dynamic opponent in Joe Biden. And Biden represented a not-so-united Democratic Party.

Now, Biden has cemented his nomination, but can barely muster a “proof of life” as NY Magazine’s Will Leitch called Biden’s sad attempt at podcasting. It’s clear Joe needs help, but the liberal media is there to help him. And the same media is out to get Trump.

Even Fox News, long seen as right-leaning (but in reality, is about as fair and balanced a network as you can find today in its news coverage, which is kept separate from its opinion shows), raises Trump’s hackles when Chris Wallace isn’t sufficiently chummy.

Circle around to the start with me: This is Donald Trump’s election to lose.

And he’s made two enormous blunders that could very well lose it.

First, Monday’s coronavirus press conference was a total disaster. It was a train wreck, launch failure, explosion of stupid. “Everything we did was right,” Trump said, straight faced, one day after Dr. Anthony Fauci admitted on CNN that no, not everything we did was right.

When reporters questioned Trump on the timeline of his response to the coronavirus outbreak, the president said ‘everything we did was right’ https://t.co/sJG37hyvlA pic.twitter.com/wU942WMv0E — Reuters (@Reuters) April 14, 2020

And this schoolyard exchange with CBS News’ Paula Reid:

President Donald J Trump calms a nation on edge pic.twitter.com/HO6Ou1XJzg — Andrew Lawrence (@ndrew_lawrence) April 13, 2020

But worst, is this gaffe. When asked what authority the president has to open the nation, when state governors are already forming coalitions, Trump responded, “I have the ultimate authority.”

“I have the ultimate authority,” President Trump says on the decision to reopen the country. https://t.co/P9xId2OutH pic.twitter.com/qZiBhdUYUU — ABC News (@ABC) April 13, 2020

This straightforward answer exposes many of Trump’s worst instincts, and his total misunderstanding of his role as POTUS. All of Trump’s talk about working with governors belies his true belief that he alone has the authority.

If you’re reading this site, you probably know he doesn’t have the authority, and I’m here to tell you he doesn’t if you don’t know it. What remains is whether you believe that Trump meant what he said. I believe he meant it, and it reminds me of why I am undecided whether to vote for him.

To be clear, Trump himself doubled down on his statement, tweeting “…it is the decision of the President, and for many good reasons.”

….It is the decision of the President, and for many good reasons. With that being said, the Administration and I are working closely with the Governors, and this will continue. A decision by me, in conjunction with the Governors and input from others, will be made shortly! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 13, 2020

Based on what happens next, I, and I believe many undecided voters, may decide to withhold my vote. The only good reason for taking any authority as president is that the Constitution grants it. And Trump, here, is dead wrong.

Second, the unveiling of Trump’s economic coronavirus council–the body that’s supposed to figure out how to open the economy–has gone poorly. The president said “great business leaders” and “great doctors” would be on the commission.

Then this happened:

I don’t see any doctors there, but I do see the president’s daughter and son-in-law. WTH?

Trump had to backtrack, telling reporters that Ivanka and Jared Kushner would not be on the “Opening Our Country Council.” But it’s vitally important that whoever is on that body is believable. Otherwise, the states are going to do their own thing (which is, Constitutionally speaking, appropriate, frankly), and ignore the federal plan.

I don’t think it’s a good idea for coalitions of states to go it alone, but if Trump fumbles the recovery, that’s what will happen.

Personally, if I were Trump, I’d name Bill Gates to run the council. I know, Gates has been the subject of some terrible fake news designed to turn conspiracy theorists against him. In reality, Gates probably understands the task better than practically anyone in the medical or the economic community. Plus, he’s super smart and genuine. And Gates could never upstage the president–he’s just too soft-spoken.

As it stands, the council will be neither bipartisan or useful. It will just be another group of yes-men echoing Trump’s barbs, and that will be a tremendous blunder.

If Trump wants to take credit for the U.S. coronavirus response and recovery (and, believe me, he does) so he can win the election, he must ensure that the recovery works. And that means coordinating with states and having a bipartisan, expert, believable group making the federal recommendations and response plan.

These two blunders could take Trump’s entire campaign off the rails. He could end up hanging himself on his own petard–claiming all authority while having none. Certainly, it will result in shrill meltdowns that CNN, The Washington Post, and The New York Times will roll in like a dog rolling in a dead skunk’s carcass.

Even Joe Biden could beat Trump if he fails make corrections.

As I began, it’s Donald Trump’s election to lose. My vote is going to go to whoever offers a sane path to recovery. Based on where Trump may be going, I’d say he is headed in the wrong direction.