Guy Fieri launches takeout version of 'Diners, Drive-Ins, and Dives'

Food Network is releasing a takeout edition of Guy Fieri's show "Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives." Food Network is releasing a takeout edition of Guy Fieri's show "Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives." Photo: Getty Images Photo: Getty Images Image 1 of / 74 Caption Close Guy Fieri launches takeout version of 'Diners, Drive-Ins, and Dives' 1 / 74 Back to Gallery

During shelter-in-place, Guy Fieri can't hit the road to try new diners, drive-ins and dives, but he can still take a trip to Flavortown. Starting April 24, Food Network is launching a three-episode takeout edition of Fieri's popular series "Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives."

In each episode, Fieri will check in with chefs around the country previously featured on the show via video chat to see how they're holding up and how they're transforming their business to meet the new takeout-only market. And don't worry — there's still cooking involved, too. Each chef Fieri talks to has also sent a full list of ingredients straight to his home kitchen, where he will prepare their featured recipes while they guide him through the steps.

"Triple D has always been about hittin’ the road and celebrating the hard workin’ folks of the restaurant business," said Fieri in a press release. "And while the restaurants are partially closed and the Camaro is parked, DDD: Takeout is here to show you how your favorite chefs are still cookin’ it up to keep people fed, support their communities, their families, and their employees."

RELATED: Flooded with applications, Guy Fieri's restaurant relief fund crashed in less than a day

"Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives" alum will teach Fieri how to cook dishes from a variety of cuisines, including chicken tamales, paella fritters and European-style dumplings.

The first episode of "Diners, Drive-Ins and Dives: Takeout" airs on Friday, April 24 at 9 p.m. ET/PT on Food Network.

Madeline Wells is an SFGATE associate digital reporter. Email: madeline.wells@sfgate.com | Twitter: @madwells22