Lori Vallow Daybell’s request for a lower bond will have to wait another week as the hearing has been rescheduled for April 24, according to EastIdahoNews.com

The Idaho Supreme Court extended its Emergency Reduction in Court Services and Limitation of Access to Court Facilities order through April 22, which limits the amount of people who can visit court facilities, EastIdahoNews.com reports.

Last week, Daybell’s team filed court documents for more bail reduction. The hearing was originally scheduled for April 17.

Vallow Daybell is currently being held on a $1 million bail on charges of desertion and nonsupport, as the Deseret News reported.

Vallow Daybell was extradited from Hawaii to Idaho earlier this year. She was sent to jail in Madison County, Idaho, on a $5 million bail. The bail was reduced to $1 million.

Vallow Daybell was expected to leave jail after the bond reduction. However, bail bond company owners told me there hasn’t been talks between Lori Vallow Daybell and those stores.

Danielle Kingston, the owner of A+ Idaho Bail Bonds in Rexburg, Idaho, told me bail bond companies won’t work with clients if they might be a flight risk.

“It doesn’t work out if we don’t feel comfortable,” she said. “You have to get to the point where you feel comfortable enough to write it.”

Vallow Daybell raises a lot of red flags for bail bondsmen, Kingston said. She already was a flight risk before her trail. But the lack of family jumping to her aid also presents problems, Kingston told me.

“If no one’s coming to your aid, if nobody is coming to post your bond, if nobody is surrounding you and saying you’re a good person ... that’s a red flag for a bail bondsman. That’s where you start seeing it either falls apart because nobody is willing to help.

“If you have no family willing to help and no friends willing to help, why would a bail bondsman be willing to help?” Kingston asked. “If we didn’t put all the requirements in place ... then we’re risking a great deal. We take that very seriously,” she said.