CLOSE Case of Phoenix girl who died in footlocker

John Allen talks to his defense attorney, Gary Beren, before being sentenced to death in Maricopa County Superior Court on Nov. 16, 2017. Allen was sentenced to death for the 2011 murder of 10-year-old Ame Deal. (Photo: Cheryl Evans/The Republic)

The Arizona Supreme Court upheld the death sentence for John Allen, who was convicted of murdering 10-year-old Ame Deal after he and his wife, Sammantha Allen — who was Deal's cousin — forced Deal into a box and padlocked the lid, leaving her to suffocate in 2011.

John Allen and his wife were both convicted of first-degree murder and child abuse charges in 2017.

Ame's grandmother, Judith Deal, was convicted of child abuse and is serving a 10-year sentence. Ame's aunt and legal guardian, Cynthia Stoltzman, is serving 24 years for child abuse while Ame's father, David Deal, is serving 14 years for child abuse.

The court's decision on Tuesday comes two and a half years after Allen was sentenced to death by lethal injection and appealed the decision. Sammantha Allen was also sentenced to death in August 2017.

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

"Eleven jurors found that Allen killed (Ame Deal), and eleven jurors found that Allen was a major participant in committing the child abuse that resulted in (Ame Deal’s) death and acted with reckless indifference towards her life," court documents state.

Court documents say Allen and the other family members in the house often used harsh punishments on Ame Deal for minor infractions.

Documents say that the night they locked Deal in a plastic box, John and Sammantha Allen forced her to face a wall and keep her arms raised while tipping her head up, do jumping jacks, run around in the yard and remain in a "backbend position" with her head and feet on the floor for three hours before John Allen locked her in the box, which was 21 inches shorter than her height, while Sammantha Allen stood by.

The punishments were for Deal allegedly stealing a popsicle.

Court documents say the jury found Allen eligible for the death penalty due to three aggravating factors:

Allen had been previously convicted of a serious offense.

The murder was especially cruel.

Allen, an adult, murdered a child under the age of 15.

Given those factors, the jury unanimously decided that Allen should receive the death penalty despite him pleading guilty and asking for natural life in prison.

Although the court upheld his death sentence, the decision also vacated Allen's sentences on conspiracy to commit child abuse, intentional child abuse and reckless child abuse, and remanded them to trial court for resentencing.

Reach the reporter Perry Vandell at 602-444-2474 or perry.vandell@gannett.com. Follow him on Twitter @PerryVandell.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/phoenix-breaking/2020/04/14/ame-deal-case-court-upholds-john-allen-death-sentence/2994061001/