It took nearly 20 years, but state archives now have reams of documents and family memorabilia from former Gov. Fife Symington. Archivists say it's a treasure trove.

Arizona Gov. Fife Symington talks with south Phoenix neighborhood association members, local business owners and church leaders at the community's YMCA about tackling issues of graffiti, cruising and gangs on June 15, 1995. Symington pledged $100,000 for summer youth jobs and gang prevention and tripled the number of police patrolling South Phoenix communities. Armondo Ruiz, executive director for Neighborhood Revitalization, is at left. (Photo: TJ Sokol/Associated Press) Story Highlights Records track Symington's years as governor, his family history

Records stored not far from the state Capitol, but away from archivists

For nearly 20 years, state archivists have puzzled, prodded and pushed to locate Fife Symington's gubernatorial records.

The former Republican governor, who left office abruptly in 1997 when a federal jury convicted him of bank fraud, said he had no idea where they were. His staff were equally clueless.

But thanks to an author working on a biography of Arizona's 19th governor, the missing records were located last month at a bland storage facility 4 miles from the state Capitol. As archival records go, it's the equivalent of finding the Lost Dutchman's gold, state officials say.

In June, the archives received nine pallets stacked with 305 boxes of Symington records. The papers document his 6 1/2 years in office, a period marked by tax reductions, personal financial ruin and a criminal trial for bank fraud. There are photos from White House visits and records from his federal trial, policy papers and a picture of the governor in the Phoenix Suns' gorilla costume. Separately, he donated a trunk full of family memorabilia that dates from the late 19th century.

Archivists are now sifting through the trove, which they estimate will take as many as 500 man-hours to process. What they are finding will add to the historical picture of Arizona in the 1990s, and perhaps show new dimensions of one of Arizona's more controversial and colorful chiefs of state.

Boxed up, then forgotten

Arizona Capitol Museum Curator Stephanie Mahan (left) and Jack August, historian for the Arizona Capitol Museum, sort through photographs and other items from Gov. Fife Symington's time in office. Boxes of personal papers, letters and objects are being cataloged. August holds up a signed photograph from President Bill Clinton. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

The records were never really lost, and certainly not forgotten by all. State law requires public officials to hand over records, something that has had spotty compliance over the years and no enforcement.

Symington said he directed his staff to box up his records and prepare for a quick exit from the governor's ninth-floor office in the event his federal trial did not end well. He did not want to linger, he said, and indeed, he said he didn't give the matter a second thought once he left in September 1997.

"That whole business of resigning and leaving office, the trauma of it, probably created its own form of PTSD," he said recently. "I moved on as quickly as I could."

“That whole business of resigning and leaving office, the trauma of it, probably created its own form of PTSD.” Former Arizona Gov. Fife Symington

And he did, preparing for an appeal that successfully overturned his conviction. Before he could be retried, then-President Bill Clinton pardoned him on Clinton's last day in office.

Symington reinvented himself as a chef, going to culinary school and later crafting desserts at an Italian restaurant in the Camelback Esplanade, the crown jewel of his former life as a developer. He dabbled in political consulting and moved, part time, to Santa Barbara.

Author Jack August, who has penned biographies of other influential Arizonans, decided to tackle a Symington biography. It took years of persistence to get the former governor to agree, but August prevailed. Then he started to lay on heavy pressure to unearth the official records, arguing they are a vital part of the story.

"I convinced him it's over," said August, who earlier this year joined the staff of the Arizona Capitol Museum as historian and director of institutional advancement.

It was time, August said, for Symington "to enter the pantheon of other governors."

The discovery

Former Arizona Gov. Fife Symington shows off his "Governor's Cake" at Franco's Italian Caffe, 2501 E. Camelback in Phoenix. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

Symington called Karen Zanzucchi, his former gubernatorial scheduler who still works for him. Do I have some records stored somewhere? he asked.

Yes, she replied, reminding him that monthly rent for the locker comes out of his accounts.

Last month, August and Symington found themselves at the room-sized locker, bolt cutters in hand. The key was long lost, so the men leaned on the cutter's handles — one on each side — and pushed so hard they tumbled over as the lock snapped.

"It was an out-of-body experience," Symington said as he surveyed the stacks of boxes. There were photos of him with George H.W. Bush, who was president when Symington won office. Shots of the two at the Grand Canyon. A photo of the governor and his son Richard at a White House dinner, presided over by another president, greeting Bill and Hillary Clinton.

"It was like a step back in time," Symington marveled.

To August, in his dual role as biographer and state employee, it was a bonanza.

"We had nothing, now we have one of the more fulsome collections (of a governor)," he said.

Eventually, the records will be available to the public through the state library's online Knowledge Center; some will be featured in a planned November exhibit at the state Capitol Museum. It's an ambitious goal: It could take up to 500 man-hours to process, said Dennis Preisler, the assistant director of archives and records management.

Symington said it's not for him to judge whether the records will change public perceptions of him.

"When you push certain initiatives and sign certain things into law, you don't have a lot of perspective," he said. Everything is so of-the-moment it's impossible to know how decisions will look years later.

But looking back, he said he's proud of the work his administration, especially adviser Rita Pearson, did on long-term water planning. The Arizona Water Banking Authority was established during his tenure, and it has left Arizona in a better position to deal with the current drought than neighboring California, which is in crisis.

Family history in a steamer trunk

Arizona Capitol Museum Historian Jack August holds up Gov. Fife Symington's I.D. badge from his time in office. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic)

In addition to reams of gubernatorial documents, state staffers are working through the steamer trunk that arrived at Symington's Santa Barbara doorstep after his mother, Martha, died. He drove to Phoenix last month and dropped it off for August and his staff to sort through and add to the state's collection.

Stephanie Mahan, the museum's curator, said the gubernatorial papers take her back to her childhood in the 1990s. But the trunk's contents go back much further: as early as an 1896 letter from Symington's grandfather, Childs Frick, to Frick's mother, Adelaide.

The Frick family connection is documented, August said, in dozens of letters.

"Symington's lineage goes deep into the history of capitalism in the United States," said August. The former governor's great-grandfather, Henry Clay Frick, made his fortune in the coke industry in the 19th century.

There are “Dear Mom” letters that a young Symington wrote home from his days at Harvard, and even a note from Buckingham Palace to Symington's mom, Martha. One of her friends was a lady-in-waiting to the British queen.

Still to be determined is if the collection includes anything documenting Symington's fascination with UFOs and his office's response to the mysterious "Phoenix lights" that hovered over the city in 1997.

Symington said he doesn't know what, if anything, relates to that part of his legacy. Although as governor he pooh-poohed notions that the lights were from extraterrestrials, he later went public with his belief in life beyond this planet.

"If a UFO lands on the White House lawn in Washington, D.C.," he said, "I know I will be the go-to governor."

Reach the reporter at maryjo.pitzl@arizonarepublic.com and follow her on Twitter @maryjpitzl.

Read or Share this story: https://azc.cc/2a50svE