A source with intimate knowledge of the situation is claiming two Fox News hosts secretly maneuvered to get Judge Jeanine Pirro suspended over her controversial remarks about Muslim Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-MN), with one, Bret Baier, allegedly seeking to curry favor with Democrats to reverse a decision to not allow Fox to host any of the party’s presidential primary debates by getting Fox to suspend Pirro. (Update: Baier denies source’s claim.)

The source asked TGP for anonymity to speak freely about the behinds the scenes maneuvers:

The original complaint came from Bret Baier’s team. Bret saw an opportunity to make Fox News acceptable enough to the left, so he could get himself a job of hosting the Democratic Debates. Bret supported one of his producers, Hufsa Kamal, in tweeting out a condemnation of Judge Jeanine to put pressure on Fox News to suspend her show. Hufsa Kamal, a producer of Special Report with Bret Baier, has a history of anti-conservative tweets.

Shepard Smith, known as a “never-Trumper”, also played a major role in the Judge’s suspension. “He lobbied 24/7 to suspend her.” Fox News placed Jerry Andrews, a far-left, anti-conservative as Executive Producer of Justice with Judge Jeanine to “muzzle Judge Jeanine from speaking the truth.” Andrews has a long history of anti-conservative, anti-Trump social media activity.

TRENDING: THE END OF AN ERA: Drudge Goes Full Leftie - Loses President Trump-- Go to Pro-Trump News Instead

Fox News has made no official statement on Pirro’s future with the cable network, other than to say it would not comment on “internal scheduling matters,” as the network abruptly pulled her regularly scheduled Justice with Judge Jeanine show last Saturday night and has apparently canceled this upcoming Saturday’s show. Anonymous sources have filled in TGP and other outlets reputed backstabbing maneuvering against Pirro.

Fox’s silence shows a lack of commitment to return Pirro to the air.

On Monday, Fox announced it was hiring former Democratic National Committee Chair Donna Brazile as a Fox News Contributor. When she worked for CNN in 2016, Brazile was busted for secretly feeding Hillary Clinton debate questions.

Anonymous sources at Fox relayed to reporters at CNN and the New York Times on Sunday that Pirro has been suspended for two weeks for her comments about Omar and a possible conflict between her adherence to Shariah Law, as represented by her wearing a hijab, and her oath to defend the Constitution. The context of Pirro’s comments was the roots of Omar’s anti-Semitism and what it means for the future of the Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) and the Democratic Party.

Jeanine Pirro was *suspended* by Fox News after her widely criticized commentary about @IlhanMN, according a source familiar with the matter. It's unclear how long the suspension will last. Fox declined to confirm or deny this. https://t.co/pp2Rn3QYb5 — Brian Stelter (@brianstelter) March 17, 2019

NYT matches my reporting from earlier today: Fox's Jeanine Pirro "has been formally suspended by the network because of her remarks, according to a person told of the decision…" https://t.co/yC5AAx1r1j — Brian Stelter (@brianstelter) March 18, 2019

Pirro has not spoken out publicly about the controversy since Sunday, March 10, when Fox issued a statement condemning her remarks and simultaneously issued a statement from Pirro explaining her comments.

More anonymous sources are now filling the void with reports that Pirro is being targeted by liberals at Fox News.

The Hollywood Reporter on Monday quoted a source close to Fox saying executives have never liked Pirro, to explain why the network stood by fellow opinion host Tucker Carlson who has also been under fire–but for remarks he made a decade ago on talk radio.

Fox News was quick to condemn Pirro’s remarks but has not criticized Carlson’s comments, some of which were made when he was an MSNBC employee. A source familiar with the network’s strategy explained the divergent approach: “They love Tucker. They do not like Jeanine Pirro. They never have.”