United's very grim outlook for 2020 'Travel demand is essentially zero and shows no sign of improving'

A United Airlines plane lands at San Francisco International Airport. In the wake of the COVID-19 outbreak, airlines are facing significant losses as people are canceling travel plans and businesses are restricting travel. less A United Airlines plane lands at San Francisco International Airport. In the wake of the COVID-19 outbreak, airlines are facing significant losses as people are canceling travel plans and businesses are ... more Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Photo: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images Image 1 of / 9 Caption Close United's very grim outlook for 2020 1 / 9 Back to Gallery

Late Wednesday, United released a statement from CEO Oscar Munoz and President Scott Kirby that paints a bleak picture for air travel through the end of this year.

You can read the entire statement here, but I'll share a few key lines that should provide consumers the gist of what United expects for the next few months, and for the remainder of the year. Sit down. It's not pretty at all.

— The challenge that lies ahead for United is bigger than any we have faced in our proud 94-year history. We are committed to being as direct and as transparent as possible with you about the decisions that lay ahead.

— We now expect United to receive approximately $5 billion from the federal government through the Payroll Support Program under the CARES Act — to be used to protect the paychecks of our United employees. This government support does not cover our total payroll expense, but we're keeping our promise that there will be no involuntary furloughs or pay rate cuts for U.S. employees before Sept. 30.

— This weekend, we'll load a revamped schedule that will further reduce our capacity to about 10% of what had been planned for May at the beginning of this year. We expect to announce similar reductions to the June schedule in the next few weeks.

— These schedule changes reflect the stark reality of our situation — and unfortunately, it's something that even legislation as large as the CARES Act can't fix. Travel demand is essentially zero and shows no sign of improving in the near-term.

— To help you understand how few people are flying in this environment, less than 200,000 people flew with us during the first two weeks of April this year, compared to more than 6 million during the same time in 2019, a 97% drop. And we expect to fly fewer people during the entire month of May than we did on a single day in May 2019.

— The historically severe economic impact of this crisis means even when travel demand starts to inch back, it likely will not bounce back quickly. We believe that the health concerns about COVID-19 are likely to linger which means even when social distancing measures are relaxed, and businesses and schools start to reopen, life won't necessarily return to normal.

— Not all states and cities are expected to reopen at the same time. Some international travel restrictions will remain in place. Meeting planners and tour operators will do their best to accommodate people looking to avoid large crowds. So, while we have not yet finalized changes to our schedule for July and August, we expect demand to remain suppressed for the remainder of 2020 and likely into next year.

— But the challenging economic outlook means we have some tough decisions ahead as we plan for our airline, and our overall workforce, to be smaller than it is today, starting as early as Oct. 1.

Read all recent TravelSkills posts here

Chris McGinnis is SFGATE's senior travel correspondent. You can reach him via email or follow him on Twitter or Facebook. Don't miss a shred of important travel news by signing up for his FREE biweekly email updates!

SFGATE participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites.