The Cowboys are on the clock.

Stephen Jones begins the virtual discussion about who is there at No. 17 when a call comes in from another club with an enticing offer to move back a few spots. Jones asks Will McClay to give his thoughts.

The club’s vice president of player personnel is three words into his reply when his square on the Webex screen freezes. A pop-up thunderstorm has hit the neighborhood where McClay lives. His internet is down. McClay quickly calls Jones, but the call drops.

What happens now?

Player evaluations remain the focal point. But how many times a player can bench-press 225 pounds and a prospect’s time in the 40 are no longer the only numbers under discussion when the NFL prohibits the Cowboys and other teams from gathering at their club facilities to conduct the draft.

How many megabits per second (Mbps) does head coach Mike McCarthy have on his internet plan at his apartment near The Star?

How many laptops and monitors does college scouting director Chris Hall need in his home?

Now that club officials have discussed how defensive end K’Lavon Chaisson and cornerback CJ Henderson fit the scheme, what provider does defensive coordinator Mike Nolan use at his home, and should he change?

The calculations that go into getting ready for this draft, which kicks off Thursday evening, are unlike any in league history. While part of the organization is talking about a prospect’s temperament, another part is building redundancies into the system to make sure the communication network is reliable if something goes wrong.

At the center of all this is an owner, Jerry Jones, who only grudgingly moved on from his flip phone a few years ago.

It should be interesting.

The framework

FILE - Cowboys owner Jerry Jones (left) and executive vice president Stephen Jones watch earlier picks in the 2015 NFL draft from the team's war room at Valley Ranch in Irving on April 30, 2015. (Smiley N. Pool / The Dallas Morning News)

A league-wide mock draft will take place Monday. All 32 teams will simulate one round of a previous draft, with trades, to ensure the technology works and club executives are comfortable with the process and how they submit picks to the league office.

It won’t be the first mock the Cowboys have conducted. Several trial runs have taken place in recent days to test the technology and methodology. There have been fire drills, comparable to the scenario in which McClay or someone else loses their internet connection, to anticipate glitches and find solutions.

Each team can designate up to three executives with the ability to submit a pick from their individual homes in an effort to work around any communication issues that may arise at one residence. A representative from the team’s information technology department is permitted at one of those three homes.

No limit has been placed on the number of employees each team can have connected remotely during the draft. The Cowboys have no intention of divulging that information.

But there are 25-plus on the coaching staff and another 25-plus from scouting and football operations. Throw in the members of the executive staff, the medical staff and …

Well, you get some idea of the scale.

A massive undertaking

Fans are interested to see what McCarthy will do in his first draft as the Cowboys’ head coach.

It can be argued that Matthew Messick is every bit as important to what unfolds in the coming days.

Messick is the club’s chief information officer. He spearheaded a working committee of people from several parts of the organization to assess the technology and implement the communication plan.

Step one: Determine the internet provider of every employee that needs to be part of the virtual war room and what package they have in their home. Diagnostic checks are essential.

Should the person change companies and/or upgrade their systems? Do routers or boosters need to be added? How much equipment do they need in their home?

Detroit Lions general manager Bob Quinn described his home office for this draft to reporters. There’s a TV, three monitors, two laptops, two cellphones, a phone dedicated strictly to the draft and his home phone.

Not everyone with the Cowboys needs this many devices. But some do.

And what about each person’s cellphone carrier? Messick and his group had to determine how many people were on different networks and their capabilities. Did everyone know how to find a Wifi hotspot on their phone to work if they have problems with the internet?

Every person who will be part of the Cowboys’ scattered, virtual war room for this draft has a different level of comfort with technology. McCarthy is said to be savvy and can adapt quickly.

Jerry Jones?

Not so much.

Chorus of voices

FILE - Cowboys owner Jerry Jones (center), then-head coach Jason Garrett (center-left), executive vice president Stephen Jones (center-right) and other executives wait to make their first pick of the 2018 NFL draft on Thursday, April 26, 2018 at The Star in Frisco. (Ashley Landis / Staff Photographer)

Once this foundation was built, the Cowboys had to determine how to collect, present and disseminate information.

Philadelphia executive vice president Howie Roseman recently held a conference call with reporters telling them how thankful he was for Microsoft teams. This has allowed the Eagles to set up different rooms, big and small, for coaches, trainers, scouts and management.

The Cowboys talk about the need for a clear decision tree. Key voices need to be heard on each personnel discussion, but the last thing the club wants is nine heads on a Brady Bunch screen competing to be heard and talking over each other. Someone needs to be in charge of filtering the information and controlling the flow.

What Jim Maurer, the team’s head athletic trainer, has to say is critical on some players under consideration. On others, he doesn’t need to be part of the conversation.

Offensive coordinator Kellen Moore doesn’t need to be on the screen when the secondary coaches are arguing the merits of Clemson’s AJ Terrell vs. Alabama’s Trevon Diggs.

It makes sense that each draft prospect will have a list of scouts, coaches and possibly doctors or trainers who are essential to be included in any conversation about that player during the draft. Those who aren’t essential will remain in their standing group or channel until needed.

None of this takes into account the trade calls that Jerry and Stephen Jones will initiate or receive over the course of the three days.

Remember, all of this must take place within a span of 10 minutes when the Cowboys are on the clock in the first round. That time frame shrinks to seven minutes in the second round and five minutes in the third.

And finally, in case you were wondering, there’s no more than a 20% chance of rain or thunderstorms in the area during the three days of the draft.

Catch David Moore on The Ticket (KTCK-AM 1310 and 96.7 FM) periodically throughout the offseason to discuss the latest Cowboys news.

Find more Cowboys stories from The Dallas Morning News here.