That caution comes in part from reactions to some of the formulas in which the quickly created 2009 pandemic flu vaccine was delivered. A small number of children in Sweden and Finland developed narcolepsy, a neurological disorder in which people fall asleep unpredictably during their waking hours, after receiving a version of the 2009 vaccine containing an adjuvant, an additional component that increased the immune system’s reaction. (That version was not used in the 2009 US campaign and is not sold in the US now.) Several months later, the government of Australia reported that up to 1 child out of 100 had fevers and convulsions after receiving a different vaccine formula that contained the 2009 strain, a reaction that other national campaigns could not identify in their data. \

Those reactions were statistically very rare, and to some extent remain mysterious. In the United States, for instance, Guillain-Barré occurs several thousand times every year, in people who have received immunizations as well as people who have not (but have experienced some other recent immune system-challenging event, such as an infection). That the cases occurred is not in dispute, but their association with vaccination was made after the cases occurred—so there is still some debate over whether they were caused by the vaccines or coincidental given how widely the vaccine was distributed. Nevertheless, the 1976 experience in particular taught health planners to set up sensitive surveillance systems before beginning the 2009 campaign, and that may have made a difference—because, though there was a rise in Guillain-Barré cases during the 2009 swine flu, it was one-tenth what it was in 1976.

Vaccines save lives and reduce illnesses and, if the Covid-19 pandemic proceeds as it has the past few months, any new vaccine against it could be in high demand. Which might put health authorities into a position that planners faced in 2009: trying to figure out who moves to the front of the line.

Flu vaccine manufacturing is scattered around the world; not every country contains a plant. Nations fortunate enough to house one have committed to the WHO to share their products equitably worldwide. But in 2009, Australia and Canada effectively nationalized their production, keeping back doses meant for other countries until they were sure their own citizens were taken care of.

“I am wondering what kind of coordination there is going to be if we do have a vaccine that becomes available for coronavirus,” says Samantha Vanderslott, a health policy expert and social science researcher at the Oxford University Vaccine Group. “Looking back at H1N1, it was very much individual countries working with suppliers to make sure they had the stocks they needed.”

Patchy supply isn’t only going to be a problem internationally. In the United States, administering public health is a state power. That means, among other things, that each state government gets to decide how to put shots into arms, even when a national vaccination program has been declared.

In 2009, that led to 50 different methods of distribution: at doctors’ offices, via pharmacists, in special mass-vaccination clinics, through the pre-existing networks that states maintain for giving childhood vaccines, and more. At the same time, to handle inevitable scarcity, states set slightly different standards for who ought to receive that vaccine first—leading to situations in which people who lived near a state line, and weren’t their own state’s priority group, could see people just like them getting the shot in the state next door.

“What’s really, really hard is those first weeks or months when there is enormous demand and there just isn’t enough to go around,” says Kelly Moore, a physician and epidemiologist who ran Tennessee’s 2009 immunization campaign within its health department and now chairs the WHO’s Immunization Practices Advisory Committee. “How do you get it to the people who are occupationally or medically at-risk? And how do you make prioritization decisions and adhere to them without letting them get in the way of administering the vaccine with appropriate speed?” Moore knows this from experience: The first vaccine shipment she received in 2009 contained just 60,000 doses to cover a state population of more than 6 million.



The channels by which a vaccine gets distributed in the US aren’t likely to be reorganized wholesale before a coronavirus vaccine arrives—so it’s critical that state governments begin laying plans now for how to share the vaccine fairly, equip the providers who will administer it, and develop the information systems to track who receives it. There isn’t a lot of institutional memory for this; Moore estimates that, out of the 64 immunization program managers now working in states, cities and territories, only a handful held those jobs in 2009.