Updated 2 p.m. April 15: Revised to include comments from Dr. Anthony Fauci.

With most Americans confined to their homes because of the coronavirus outbreak, many are eager to know when the country can return to normal.

The short answer is that no one can say for sure when social-distancing restrictions can be lifted. Lack of widespread testing makes that difficult to predict. And, more waves of the virus could follow the first.

Here are some key things that need to happen before life can return to normal, health experts say.

Widespread testing and contact-tracing

The U.S. lags other countries in COVID-19 testing capabilities. Many people with mild symptoms are denied tests because there aren’t enough for everyone, and in many parts of the country tests are reserved for at-risk patients or first-responders.

While the country is still working to increase testing, the lack of wider availability is dangerous because evidence increasingly shows that people can transmit the virus to others without feeling sick or showing symptoms.

Health experts say increasing testing capability is important not only for determining who is sick, but also for finding hidden clusters of the disease — places where the virus is spreading when there are no symptoms or symptoms are mild.

Until that happens, health experts and public officials won’t have a true, accurate picture of the outbreak.

“It's kind of … like trying to put out a fire without knowing where the fire is, or how fast it's spreading, or how it's spreading," Pinar Keskinocak, director of the Center for Health and Humanitarian Systems at the Georgia Institute of Technology, told Live Science.

Another important process that increased testing can help with is contact tracing — or finding everyone a person has been in contact with once they test positive. Usually, a contact would be quarantined and monitored by local health officials, and if that person tests positive, the contact tracing would start again.

Robert Redfield, director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, told National Public Radio last week that the agency has a plan for aggressive testing and contact-tracing that could get the country back on track to normalcy.

“It is going to be critical," Redfield said. "We can't afford to have multiple community outbreaks that can spiral up into sustained community transmission — so it is going to be very aggressive, what I call 'block and tackle,' 'block and tackle.'”

The process of contact-tracing is intense and would require a significant increase in health personnel across the country. In places like South Korea, the process was largely done through technology, like through the use of surveillance cameras, and credit card and cell phone data. But that likely wouldn’t be possible in the U.S. due to privacy concerns.

Redfield told NPR that the federal government would likely have to help, which could include deploying more people from the CDC across the country. He didn’t specify how and when this would happen, but he did tell the outlet the CDC hopes to get the country back to work “shortly after the end of this month.”

But Dr. Anthony Fauci, the government’s top infectious disease expert, said this week that the country does not have the testing and contact-tracing needed to reopen the country by May 1, when stay-at-home and other orders across the country are set to expire.

“We have to have something in place that is efficient and that we can rely on, and we’re not there yet,” Fauci told The Associated Press.

Hospitals need to be fully prepared for new cases

The main reason for implementing widespread social distancing is to flatten the curve of the outbreak, or slow down the number of cases over a longer period so that health care providers aren’t overwhelmed.

Experts say social distancing should end only when hospitals are fully prepared for new cases.

Ideally, the production of ventilators, personal protective equipment and other supplies will be increased during the time spent social distancing to ensure hospitals have what they need.

Social distancing measures also help hospitals buy time to get better organized and find more beds and space to treat people.

New cases need to decrease consistently

One sign that social distancing can end is when new cases consistently decline, health experts say.

But how much they need to decline is not clear. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said last week that social distancing measures can begin to be relaxed once there are “essentially no new cases, no deaths for a period of time,” adding that robust testing and contact tracing is needed for that to happen.

A widely shared plan written by Scott Gottlieb, the former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, and several co-authors outlines what steps should be taken to combat the virus so social distancing can end. The plan has four phases: slowing the spread (the phase the country is in), reopening schools and businesses state-by-state, establishing protection against the virus and lifting all restrictions, and preparing for the next epidemic.

Gottlieb’s plan says states should report a sustained reduction in cases for at least two weeks before businesses can begin to reopen. The report also says increased testing, contact-tracing and hospital capacity are needed for this to happen.

Another important factor is what’s known as the reproductive rate of the virus, or how many new infections happen after one person tests positive. An editorial by top U.S. health authorities in The New England Journal of Medicine put the rate at 2.2, while other health experts believe the rate is between 2 and 4.

Experts say the rate will need to be brought below 1 for a decline in cases to be sustained.

Some states are also keeping an eye on the doubling time of cases, deaths and hospitalizations. The more days it takes for these numbers to double, the flatter the curve is getting, health experts say.

Herd immunity can help, but it’s not the best strategy

Some public officials have suggested herd immunity as a strategy to deal with the coronavirus.

Herd immunity occurs when a large percentage of the population becomes sick with a disease and develops immunity.

If enough people are immune, that provides protection to others who haven’t had the virus.

But health experts say that strategy is dangerous because it would require a lot of people to get sick. Health experts have put the percentage of the population that would need to be immune anywhere from 70% to 95%.

That’s extremely risky because of the seriousness of COVID-19 and because not much is known about immunity to the virus — including whether people can get it more than once.

With just under half a million cases confirmed in the United States, which has more than 372 million people, herd immunity could take a long time to achieve. It’s even further away in Texas, which has just under 12,000 cases and more than 28 million people.

The development of a vaccine could help achieve herd immunity, but that’s a long way off. Even though several efforts are underway to develop a vaccine, health experts say it could be at least 12 to 18 months until one becomes available.

Health experts say that until a vaccine becomes available, social distancing is the best bet to combat the virus’ spread.

So, when will all that happen?

Health experts say that once contact tracing and testing is improved, we’ll be able to better predict when social distancing can end. And when it ends also depends on where you live and how widespread the disease is in your community.

The Atlantic spoke with several disease and health experts who gave timelines for a return to full normalcy ranging from one to two months, all the way to a year or longer.

Experts say strict stay-at-home measures could be eased in the meantime — business and restaurants may open by the summer, for example, while concerts, festivals and other large gatherings might continue to be put on hold.

“I think it will take us another year to be able to breathe freely and return to a well-known routine," Bojana Berić-Stojšić, an ambassador for the United Nations' Society for Public Health Education and director of the master of public health program at Fairleigh Dickinson University, told Good Housekeeping. "Until then, gradually we will return to our familiar circles of people; initially smaller gatherings, then larger."

And it’s important for people to prepare for a “stop-and-go” response to lifting social distancing guidelines, health experts say.

If restrictions are eased too early and cases start to rise again, restrictions might have to be put back in place until health officials are confident that new cases are slowing and that health-care providers can appropriately respond.