Routes: Airline service bottoms out. Will a bounce follow? A weekly roundup of airline and airport route and service news

Saddest news of the week for some: Taiwan's EVA has temporarily grounded its Hello Kitty themed aircraft. Saddest news of the week for some: Taiwan's EVA has temporarily grounded its Hello Kitty themed aircraft. Photo: EVA Air Photo: EVA Air Image 1 of / 11 Caption Close Routes: Airline service bottoms out. Will a bounce follow? 1 / 11 Back to Gallery

Now that international and domestic airline service has been reduced about as much as it can be, the industry is starting to see a few faint signs of a turnaround – but it won’t be a V-shaped recovery, and it won’t come soon.

American’s chief sees renewed interest in travel, but the carrier is canceling a number of summer routes and pushing back other service resumptions into the fall; an airline requires passengers to wear face masks; a business travel group sees signs of a revival; United’s top executives paint a grim picture for the carrier; TSA relaxes some screening rules for the coronavirus era; San Francisco service resumption is tentatively planned by Virgin, Emirates, KLM.

As airline schedules shift from spring to what used to be called the peak summer travel season, most carriers are hedging their bets on the next few months, revising their schedule plans literally every few days. And schedule announcements that do emerge all come with the caveat that they are subject to change. We’re seeing lots of seasonal summer routes being canceled and a number of route suspensions being extended into the fall, and basically just a whole lot of operational uncertainty from the airlines.

Still, American Airlines CEO Doug Parker said in a CNBC interview this week that his company has started to see passenger bookings “tick up a little bit again” for travel more than 90 days out, as well as some interest from corporate customers in meetings and events travel later in the year. Renewed trip planning “certainly isn’t going on in the second and third quarter,” Parker said, but he does see “a little bit of an indication that maybe our country’s ready to get moving again.”

Air Canada is making its recommended face-covering practice mandatory as an additional safeguard for its customers and crew starting on April 20. "The requirement will apply to customers at various points in Canadian airports, during the boarding process and during flight as may be directed by Air Canada staff where social distancing is not possible. Travellers who do not have their own face-covering will be provided with a suitable mask at security by CATSA," according to an Air Canada statement.

A new member survey from the Global Business Travel Association (which represents corporate travel managers) released last week found that while business trips currently “have come to a halt across the globe,” about half the respondents said they expect to see some travel activity resume within the next two to three months.

DON'T MISS: San Francisco's 25 largest airlines, ranked

A grimmer picture came from United Airlines this week, in a message from CEO Oscar Munoz and President Scott Kirby. They said they now expect United’s May capacity to be just 10 percent of what had been planned earlier this year, with a similar dismal outlook for June. “While we have not yet finalized changes to our schedule for July and August, we expect demand to remain suppressed for the remainder of 2020 and likely into next year,” they said. “Travel demand is essentially zero and shows no sign of improving in the near-term.”

In terms of international travel, a lot depends not only on a revival of passenger demand but also on the relaxation of draconian entry restrictions on travelers that have been imposed by a number of countries and regions. These vary considerably from one country to another, but Cathay Pacific Airlines has put together a useful chart that summarizes most of them. You can see it here.

Photo: Dept. Of Homeland Security The TSA now allows travelers to wear face masks during airport...

In the U.S., the Transportation Security Administration – which is benefiting from a hugely reduced workload at the nation’s airports these days – this week relaxed a couple of its rules for passengers screening. In an exemption from its 3.4-ounce maximum size rule for containers of liquids and gels, the agency said each passenger can now carry one bottle of liquid hand sanitizer up to 12 ounces in their carry-on bags, although it will need to be screened separately. Alcohol or antibacterial wipes are also permitted in carry-ons. Travelers are also now allowed to wear face masks during screening, although TSA officers “may ask the traveler to adjust the mask to visually confirm their identity during the travel document checking process,” TSA said. (And it’s a good move for protecting TSA officers; more than 400 of them have now tested positive for COVID-19.)

American Airlines this week revised its international schedules for May and beyond, and while a few long-haul routes are tentatively slated to resume in early June, “further changes remain likely in the next few days,” said Routesonline.com. At Los Angeles International, Beijing service that was due to resume April 25 has been pushed back to Oct. 23. LAX-London is set to revive June 4 with one daily flight, but LAX-Hong Kong won’t start until Oct. 24. Late October resumptions are now planned for LAX service to Sydney, Shanghai, Buenos Aires and Sao Paulo, but a new LAX-Tokyo Haneda route is set to go July 7. In addition, a number of American’s planned seasonal routes to Europe have now been canceled for the summer. You can see all the most recent revisions for AA’s hubs here.

Don't miss a shred of important travel news! Sign up for our FREE bi-weekly email alerts.

A few foreign carriers are looking to resume service on select international routes in the next few months, including some to San Francisco. For example, KLM’s latest schedule update shows tentative plans to bring back San Francisco-Amsterdam service on July 4. Its current reduced schedule effective for May has been now extended through June, including three weekly LAX and Atlanta flights. Emirates’ latest schedule update this week shows a resumption of Dubai-San Francisco service on June 1 and LAX on July 1, both with a daily A380 flight. And Virgin Atlantic has initially set an April 28 date for restarting London flights from LAX, followed on May 4 by San Francisco and Seattle. Korean Air’s update this week for May 1-31 service shows three weekly flights to SFO and service to LAX, New York, Atlanta and Chicago, but continued suspension of other U.S. routes.

And here’s the really bad news from Taiwan’s EVA Air: “Due to the impact of COVID-19, We are temporarily suspending our Hello Kitty Jet service until further notice,” the carrier said, referring to its aircraft that feature special livery and service items with a theme focused on Sanrio animation characters. They have been used on select international routes including to the U.S.

On the domestic scene, the Transportation Department indicated it is going to be tough in granting airline requests to suspend service to some airports during the crisis. DOT has set minimum domestic service requirements for all airlines that are seeking federal bailout funds, although it allows them to request exemptions for some airports. JetBlue was among the first to file exemption requests, asking for permission to stop flying through June 10 to Sacramento, Albuquerque, Bozeman, Dallas/Ft. Worth, Houston Bush Intercontinental, Minneapolis-St. Paul, Palm Springs, Portland, Reno, Worcester (Mass.) and two regional Puerto Rico airports. But DOT denied the exemptions for all but the two Puerto Rico airports. The agency was also tough on Spirit Airlines, barring it from halting service to 25 of the 26 airports for which it had requested exemptions.

Read all recent TravelSkills posts here

Chris McGinnis is SFGATE's senior travel correspondent. You can reach him via email or follow him on Twitter or Facebook. Don't miss a shred of important travel news by signing up for his FREE biweekly email updates!

SFGATE participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites.