In jail, COVID-19 can be a death sentence, even for those who aren’t on death row. As we endure this pandemic crisis, we should consider the words of former Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel, who cautioned we should not let this crisis go to waste. We can learn from and use the awfulness of COVID-19 to be a catalyst for comprehensive criminal justice reform, which has seen fits and starts in certain counties, cities and states around the country but never on a large scale. Now is that time.

The U.S. has many noteworthy distinctions that separate it from its world partners. Yet, our country also has some dubious distinctions. One, in particular, is its incarceration rate, the highest in the world. Compared to Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development member countries, the U.S. rate is more than double (655 per 100,000 persons) that of the second-highest country, Turkey (318 per 100,000).

These prisons were designed to keep people in, not keep viruses out; COVID-19 has breached several facilities with deadly effect. The virus is a public health crisis that threatens not only prisoners but also correctional facility workers and the neighboring communities. According to the Federal Bureau of Prisons, one-third of federal prisons and residential reentry centers have been affected nationwide.

However, the overwhelming majority of incarcerated people in the U.S. reside in state and local facilities. One Chicago facility is the leading single-site facility in the country with over 450 COVID-positive inmates and employees. Similar medical crises are happening in facilities across the country, and many of the infected are pretrial detainees, who are there because they could not afford bond.

Although jails and prisons are filled with adults, we cannot lose sight of COVID-19 within juvenile facilities. The risk to the community is similar to that of adult facilities, but also these youth should not have to be worried about infectious viruses but instead focus on changing their lives by participating in evidence-based programming to develop their decision-making skills and curb their drug and alcohol addictions. There is still time for juvenile offenders to turn their lives around. As one of us has found in his research, the public not only believes this to be the case, but they are also willing to provide economic support for it.

We are not advocating a blanket release of inmates and prisoners. There are certainly some who need to be locked up. But there are quite a few — mainly nonviolent offenders — who do not belong in jail, especially when they are awaiting bond hearings or trials to begin. There are good risk assessment tools that can help justice officials make the right decisions about who needs to be separated from society and who can be freed for a period of time. Some counties and states have already started releasing nonviolent inmates, and the crime rates have not soared in those communities.

Dr. Anthony Fauci and Dr. Deborah Birx were spot-on when they called for social distancing. People are practicing it and we are seeing its positive effects. We can also translate social distancing within the context of criminal justice reform. We can be smart on crime by being smarter on people. And we can be smart on COVID-19 by being smarter on those who are detained and who cannot practice social distancing. Let’s not allow this opportunity to go to waste.

Dr. Brian Williams is the special adviser for health equity to Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins and an associate professor of trauma and acute care surgery at the University of Chicago.

Alex R. Piquero is a professor of criminology and director of social impact research at The University of Texas at Dallas.

They wrote this column for The Dallas Morning News.