One of the most confusing parts of the presidency of the serial adulterer and noted liar Donald Trump is the outpouring of support from evangelical Christians he enjoys. On Tuesday, an interview with former Congresswoman Michele Bachmann provided insight into how the Christian evangelicals see Trump, the reasons for the support became clear.

Evangelical Christian and former member of Congress Michele Bachmann claims that "we will in all likelihood never see a more godly, biblical president again in our lifetime" than Trump | Analysis by CNN's Chris Cillizza https://t.co/0J4jj4WLq8 pic.twitter.com/rS34zLjn4N — CNN (@CNN) April 16, 2019

In an interview with far-right website Understanding These Times, Bachmann described the president in terms that most people would see as hypocritical and extremely misguided. The three-times-married, three-time cheater with porn stars and Playboy bunnies whose name is synonymous with greed as “biblical” and “godly.”

‘[Trump] is highly biblical, and I would say to your listeners, we will in all likelihood never see a more godly, biblical president again in our lifetime. So we need to be not only praying for him, we need to support him, in my opinion, in every possible way that we can.’

Michele Bachmann also said she's praying to expose the "deep state," which she claimed is working "to advance the goals of Islamic jihad." https://t.co/toZnV21282 — HuffPost (@HuffPost) April 16, 2019

The website claims that all negative views of Trump are simply the result of a “deep state” conspiracy by the global elite who cannot control Trump and convince him to do evil and ungodly things like supporting a woman’s right to make reproductive health decisions or protect the civil liberties of LGBTQ Americans. The website features rhetoric like this and has a strong evangelical Christian following:

‘Just what is the ‘deep state’ and how are they promoting end-time lawlessness? How does President Trump fulfill prophecy? A multi-billionaire cabal is pushing for global government and Michele explains who they are and why.’

Throwback Monday: The thrice-married philanderer, who cheated on his third wife with a porn star while she was nursing his fifth child, thinks he is being audited by the IRS because he's a "strong Christian." https://t.co/yb1aJfYtYg — Jon Cooper (@joncoopertweets) April 15, 2019

The real reasons for Trump’s evangelical support were revealed soon into the interview. Trump hates who they hate: Muslims and transgender people. The “Deep State” wants Islamic jihad; Trump bashes a Muslim congresswoman and promised to ban Muslims from the country. The “Deep State” wants godly gender roles to disappear; Trump banned trans soldiers from the military. The religious group who claim to be followers of a prophet who preached love and forgiveness are all in for a man who doesn’t know the meaning of either of those words.

‘Bachmann’s comments about Trump’s faith immediately followed a portion of the interview where she praised his military ban on transgender personnel, explaining that “he has stood up where most Republicans wouldn’t dare to stand up.” In fact, when evangelicals call Trump biblical, they are often talking about his policies on issues like Israel and abortion, rather than personal morality.’

"The Bible means a lot to me, but I don't want to get into specifics" — Trump. I will never write a line of dialogue that good. — Chris Weitz (@chrisweitz) June 26, 2016

Featured image via Flickr by Gage Skidmore under a Creative Commons license