Rep. Drew Ferguson Anderson (Drew) Drew FergusonTop Georgia Republican endorses Doug Collins Senate bid House GOP whip team seeks to get Republicans behind Senate coronavirus bill 14 things to know today about coronavirus MORE (R-Ga.) on Monday announced his support for Rep. Doug Collins Douglas (Doug) Allen CollinsTop Georgia Republican endorses Doug Collins Senate bid Loeffler liquidates stocks amid uproar over trades after Senate coronavirus briefing Democrats text over 1 million Georgia voters to boost mail voting efforts MORE (R-Ga.) in his bid to unseat Sen. Kelly Loeffler Kelly LoefflerTrump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day New ad targets McConnell's 'culture of corruption' amid coronavirus pandemic MORE (R-Ga.), providing Collins with a key endorsement in the heated battle over the seat formerly held by Sen. Johnny Isakson Johnny IsaksonTop Georgia Republican endorses Doug Collins Senate bid Loeffler liquidates stocks amid uproar over trades after Senate coronavirus briefing Democrats text over 1 million Georgia voters to boost mail voting efforts MORE (R-Ga.).

Ferguson, the House GOP’s chief deputy whip, is the first of the Georgia delegation to endorse Collins, lauding his work defending President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE during the impeachment proceedings while serving as the top Republican on the House Judiciary Committee.

“When [Speaker] Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiLady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Trump criticizes Pelosi over stalemate on small business loan funds MORE [D-Calif.], [Rep.] Adam Schiff Adam Bennett SchiffPelosi to appear on 'Fox News Sunday' for first time since 2017 Krystal and Saagar debate former Clinton advisor on Biden's electability Schiff throws support behind Biden MORE [D-Calif.] and their crazy entourage went after the President, we didn’t have to wonder where Doug Collins stood. He was on the front lines as the President’s number one defender in the entire country,” he said in a statement.

ADVERTISEMENT

“He did the President and the country a great service and his arguments carried the day. We knew with absolute certainty where Doug stood from day one and we know with the same certainty where he will stand in the future. That certainty is critical in these challenging times,” he added.

Ferguson went on to call on his colleagues to rally behind one another, taking a thinly veiled swing at Loeffler, who recently came under fire for buying and selling large quantities of stock following a classified briefing. Loeffler adamantly denies any wrongdoing, asserting her investments are managed by outside investment advisers.

“Doug is a proven leader — a steady hand in tough times. He knows what it takes to lead. Right now, we have lives and businesses and an economy to save and we don’t need anything to take our focus off of that mission,” Ferguson continued in his statement.

“Georgia Republicans need to unify behind Doug and leave the distractions and uncertainty of other candidates in the rearview mirror. Doug Collins is my friend and he’s done a great job for Georgia in Congress. He will be an outstanding Senator and he has my full support in his campaign,” he added.

Collins announced his decision to challenge Loeffler — who was appointed by Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp (R) to fill Isakson’s seat after he stepped down at the end of last year due to a series of health issues — in January, sparking strong intraparty tensions.

ADVERTISEMENT

Both candidates have received high-profile endorsements, with Collins receiving support from House Freedom Caucus Chairman Andy Biggs (R-Ariz.), American Conservative Union Chairman Matt Schlapp, Fox News host Sean Hannity Sean Patrick HannityJoe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse Dennis Miller jokes he's eating hydroxychloroquine-marinated steaks while 'wasting away in mitigation-ville' Fox News asks court to toss lawsuit calling network a public health risk MORE and conservative radio host Mark Levin Mark Reed LevinThe Memo: Speculation grows about Fauci's future Top Georgia Republican endorses Doug Collins Senate bid Nikki Haley expected to endorse Loeffler in Senate race MORE.

Loeffler has received the backing of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse GOP Rep. French Hill named to coronavirus oversight committee MORE (R-Ky.), Sens. Marsha Blackburn Marsha BlackburnThe Hill's Coronavirus Report: Senior Pa. banking official calls for another T package; Trump tips hat to govs Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening China hawks flex muscle amid coronavirus fallout MORE (R-Tenn.), Tom Cotton Thomas (Tom) Bryant CottonBeijing's coronavirus blunder empowers anti-China hawks GOP senators push for quick, partial reopening of economy China hawks flex muscle amid coronavirus fallout MORE (R-Ark.) and Deb Fischer Debra (Deb) Strobel FischerTop Georgia Republican endorses Doug Collins Senate bid Senators balance coronavirus action with risks to health Coronavirus takes toll on Capitol Hill MORE (R-Neb.) and the National Republican Senatorial Committee, among others.

Collins thanked Ferguson for his endorsement, saying he’s “honored and humbled” to receive his support.

“It means more to me than I can express that Drew is standing by my side in this campaign. He is an indispensable leader in the fight for the President’s agenda, a tireless champion for his district and a very good friend,” he said in a statement.

“Drew’s rapid rise to a leadership position came due to his smarts, hard work and ability to serve as an honest broker between all the disparate views held in the House Chamber. I will lean on his wisdom during this campaign as I do in Washington,” he added.