Editor’s note: Art and the City is a special project by The Dallas Morning News arts and entertainment staff. We asked more than 100 members of North Texas’ creative community to tell us in their own words how they are living life and making art during the great shutdown of 2020. We also asked artists to share a piece of work that is especially meaningful to them right now. You can contribute to this project by emailing us at artslife@dallasnews.com or share your work online with the hashtag #DFWArtMatters. We are sharing work weekly in our free Arts & Entertainment newsletter; sign up at join.dallasnews.com/newsletter.

Want to see more from Art and the City 2020? Check out the links below:

Works from other art disciplines will be published throughout the month of April. Check back to see even more!

A love letter to Dallas theater

The Bippy Bobby Boo Show, a spoof of a ’60s musical-variety TV series that we premiered in October 2019 at Theatre Too, reminded me why I love to make dance and theater. [You can watch the performance April 10-12 through a link here and pay what you can here.] In a way, it was a love letter to Dallas theater and our community. The show excited me. The entire process was a group effort from start to finish — especially when a few days before we opened, we threw the script on the ground and completely restructured the entire show. We found magic in the room as an ensemble, and together we created a world in which we could laugh and enjoy each other’s company. We had fun, and that translated to the stage and to the audience.

— Danielle Georgiou is a choreographer, writer and director. A new version of “The Bibby Bobby Boo Show” is slated to return to Theatre Too in October 2020.

Justin Locklear and Danielle Georgiou, the writers behind 'The Bippy Bobby Boo Show'.

Missing the power of touch

While sheltering in place, I’ve realized how much of my own artistry is rooted in human contact. As a theater director, I love making plays in which the actors and audience interact. In my production of Hair, we reconfigured the theater to have the actors and audience share the same space. There was no traditional stage. Instead, the actors danced with the audience, gave them costume pieces and invited them to say lines of dialogue, shared food with them, played games together and even slid down a huge slide. It was a party where everyone was present together, rather than having the audience sit in the dark and the actors pretend not to see them. In this time of social isolation, I can’t wait to make theater again with lots of touching and hugging. I’m imagining all the awesome things we can create when the city reopens and we all come together.

— Kevin Moriarty is the artistic director of Dallas Theater Center and was the theater director of “Hair.”

Dallas Theater Center's Artistic Director, Kevin Moriarty, works with Booker T. Washington High School students during a rehearsal of 'Hair' in 2015. (Allison Slomowitz / Special Contributor)

‘Livelihoods are built on people being together in a room telling stories’

We opened this season with the world premiere of A Love Offering by local playwright Jonathan Norton. I chose this for two reasons: It’s a play about caregivers and how caring for others can be as bruising as it is healing, which makes me think of all of our heroes — medical staff, grocery store associates, delivery drivers — taking care of us right now while putting themselves at risk. And second, this was a script by a local playwright, developed and supported by local theaters [Kitchen Dog Theater, Undermain Theatre, Bishop Arts Theatre Center] performed and designed by all local artists. Our wonderful D-FW theater community is weighing heavy on my heart right now — how these artists who often survive gig to gig are making it and how our theaters, whose livelihoods are built on people being together in a room telling stories, are going to weather this crisis.

— Tina Parker is co-artistic director of Kitchen Dog Theater and an actress known for her role as Francesca Liddy, Saul Goodman’s assistant on AMC’s “Breaking Bad” and “Better Call Saul.”

From left: Kitchen Dog Theater's managing director Tim Johnson, and co-artistic directors Tina Parker and Chris Carlos, in 2018. (Rose Baca / Staff Photographer)

Second acts

Actress Allison Pistorius (right) and her husband, actor Chris Hury, play with their triplets at home in 2019. (Ashley Landis / Staff Photographer)

Regular readers of the Sunday Arts & Entertainment section may recall that we are proud parents of triplet girls. We’re also professional actors. As the entertainment industry in D-FW and elsewhere grinds to a halt, the pandemic has not only cost us work, but also our child care support. So out of the frying pan and into the full-time-parent fire we go. Our days are busier now than before social distancing as we become a well-oiled diaper-changing, meal-preparing, toddler-wrangling machine, while still carving out time to work, study, teach online, exercise, spend time together and enjoy a much-needed drink before doing it all again tomorrow. We just finished watching Fleabag on Amazon Prime and were reminded of the power of a well-acted story. It was funny, moving and hopeful with wonderfully nuanced performances. We can’t begin to thank health care staff, grocery employees and other front line, essential workers enough. But the past two weeks have taught us that art, while perhaps not essential, has definitely been necessary in tempering the gloom and doom of these strange times — after getting three 16-month-old dynamos to sleep, of course.

— Allison Pistorius played the title role of “Dracula” for Theatre Three last October. Her husband, Chris Hury, starred in Stage West’s production of “The Lifespan of a Fact.”

Shifting attitudes

My most meaningful Uptown Players production in recent years would be La Cage Aux Folles, by Jerry Herman and Harvey Fierstein. Most people are familiar with the story from the film version, The Birdcage, which came out in 1996. La Cage Aux Folles was entertaining and insightful with a message for everyone. It helped to enhance the gay community by providing viability of gay culture to mainstream society. This viability became a tool to shift public attitudes toward a more tolerant view of gay culture and lifestyle. Besides that, it was a lot of fun, with lots of sparkly costumes and production numbers.

— Jeff Rane is the artistic producer of Uptown Players in Dallas.

Waiting for the rapture

A scene from "Raptured" in Dallas

Theatre Three commissioned Dallas playwright Matt Lyle to write a play for our 57th season, my second as artistic director. He delivered a sex farce [called Raptured] set in an East Texas Baptist Church. I’m a big fan of Lyle’s work because of his incredible ability to wage war on society’s injustices with comedy and satire, a skill devalued in recent years by American theaters, in my humble opinion. This play embodies the direction in which I’m leading this esteemed institution with a commitment to local artists, fun and community. A year after it was produced, it has new significance — the hallmark of any good play. The congregants had isolated themselves in the church to wait out the rapture (falsely predicted by their con-man preacher). In the end, they find solace not with a false prophet but each other, their community.

— Jeffrey Schmidt is the artistic director of Theatre Three in Dallas.

Dallas playwright Matt Lyle, left, and Jeffrey Schmidt, artistic director of Theatre Three in 2017. (Ron Heflin / Special Contributor)

Out of darkness, into the light

Actor Garret Storms and Natalie Young in "Lela & Co."

This time last year, I was beginning performances for Cordelia Lynn’s Lela & Co. at Second Thought Theatre. It is a two-person play that takes an uncompromising look at some humanity’s darkest corners — and its brightest. The endurance and finesse to calibrate the style and storytelling each night required athleticism, discipline and focus. But it was actually a blast. Getting the opportunity to work with Natalie Young (who played the title character and, frankly, carried the show) and the director, Kara-Lynn Vaeni, was incredible. We genuinely had a great time putting this gruesome story together. I admire and respect these astonishingly talented women.

— Garret Storms is an actor based in Dallas.

Find more performing arts stories from The Dallas Morning News here.

Find the latest news on Coronavirus from The Dallas Morning News here.