Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Sen. Ed Markey (at right) hold a news conference for their proposed “Green New Deal” on Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C., February 7, 2019. (Jonathan Ernst/Reuters)

Being a leader requires a lot more than just fantasizing about pie-in-the-sky proposals that have no real future.

Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez hit back at all of the people who have been criticizing her for her Green New Deal during a New York Hall of Science event — even claiming that she’s “the boss” because of it.

“You know what? I don’t care anymore, because at least I’m trying and they’re not,” she said .

Advertisement

She continued:

“So people are like ‘Oh it’s unrealistic, oh it’s vague, oh it doesn’t address this little minute thing’ and I’m like ‘You try! You do it!’ Because you’re not, so until you do it, I’m the boss, how about that?”

Ocasio-Cortez has also made some similar comments on her Twitter feed, such as this one:

Yup. If you don’t like the #GreenNewDeal, then come up with your own ambitious, on-scale proposal to address the global climate crisis. Until then, we’re in charge – and you’re just shouting from the cheap seats. https://t.co/h3KSJhHqDN — Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (@AOC) February 23, 2019

Sorry, AOC — but this line of thinking is completely ridiculous. For one thing, someone should probably remind her that her job title is “representative” and not “God.” Her job is not to be a “boss,” but rather a servant of the people whom she represents. We aren’t supposed to be working for her; she’s supposed to be working for us.

Advertisement

Second of all, crowning yourself as “the boss” (or any other sort of superlative title) because you came up with a “plan” that won’t even work is absurd. Make no mistake: No one with a fully functioning brain thinks it’s viable to completely eliminate all carbon emissions in ten years. Even if it were, no one with even an ounce of understanding about the economy thinks it would be wise to enact something that would completely destroy a multitude of industries. How the hell are you putting yourself on a pedestal for coming up with a plan that doesn’t work? I mean, if I suggested that we eliminate all of the carbon emissions from air travel by instead flying around on unicorns, would that make me “the boss”? Because honestly, my unicorn plan is about as feasible as Ocasio-Cortez’s Green New Deal is.

It’s clear that Ocasio-Cortez thinks she’s some kind of hero for at least “trying” to solve environmental issues, but the truth is, putting forth a “plan” that could never be executed does about as much good as putting forth nothing at all. After all, a plan that isn’t feasible and the absence of a plan will have the same results — that is, no results at all. She, of course, would disagree; she’d say that at least people are talking about it and then again credit herself for starting that conversation. That’s obviously delusional . . . climate change and what to do about it have been major topics of discussion since I can remember, and anyone who has been paying even any attention would know that.

Advertisement

Would the world be a better place if the United States eliminated all carbon emissions? Of course it would — just like it would be better if we all got free Lamborghinis. The truth, however, is that being a notable leader requires a lot more than just fantasizing about pie-in-the-sky proposals that have no real future. It requires having the kinds of ideas that actually are possible — and having a plan for how to execute them. It should go without saying, but in order to credit yourself with spearheading solutions to a problem, you probably should actually have some of them first.