Rep. Matt Gaetz Matthew (Matt) GaetzGOP Rep. Gaetz pays campaign donor for office space despite House rules: report GOP senator: Burr owes everybody an explanation over stock sales House GOP lawmakers urge Senate to confirm Vought MORE (R-Fla.) has paid a campaign donor for office space in Florida "at or below" market rate, despite House rules prohibiting such arrangements, Politico reports.

Gaetz and Pensacola real estate developer Collier Merrill told the outlet that the district office was being leased below market value, though Gaetz later told the outlet it was “at or below market rate.”

Merrill has been involved in Gaetz's political career for years, hosting fundraisers at his properties and advising Gaetz on policy matters.

ADVERTISEMENT

Politico reports that Gaetz has paid more than $184,000 to Merrill’s Empire Partners LLC to rent the sixth-floor of a historic building in Pensacola, Fla., since he entered Congress in 2017.

“I probably be damned if I do, damned if I didn't. If I [set the rent] too cheap, I'm probably doing him a favor, if I do it too expensive, he’s doing me a favor,” Merrill told Politico.

Gaetz has insisted that his relationship with Merrill is appropriate.

“Every member of Congress has relationships with their donors,” Gaetz told the outlet. “The question is whether or not those relationships are improper or illegal.”

House rules specify that members must seek leases for district offices "at fair market value" and "as the result of a bona fide, arms-length, marketplace transaction."

"The Lessor and Lessee certify that the parties are not relatives nor have had, or continue to have, a professional or legal relationship (except as a landlord and tenant)," the rules add.

ADVERTISEMENT

A spokesperson for Gaetz said in a lengthy response that he has "never represented Empire Partners, LLC, which owns the office space the district office rents, in his capacity as a lawyer."

"He represented Collier Merrill in his individual capacity nearly five years ago on a local noise violation at his restaurant," the spokesperson said.

The aide also maintained that the Florida Republican "never realized personal financial gain" from renting the office space, saying that Gaetz leased the space "at or below market rate" but said the lease "was approved twice by the House" at the beginning of each new Congress.

His office also maintained that "nothing about a bona fide, arms-length, marketplace transaction precludes a member of Congress from saving taxpayers money."

Gaetz in a tweet and through his spokesperson accused Sen. Richard Burr Richard Mauze BurrGOP Rep. Gaetz pays campaign donor for office space despite House rules: report Analysis shows Burr had middling success as stock picker before recent .7M sell-off New ad targets McConnell's 'culture of corruption' amid coronavirus pandemic MORE (R-N.C.) of being behind the fresh attention to his lease arrangement, calling it "a weak attempt by the Burr camp to smear the Congressman for pointing out Burr’s corrupt actions."

The Florida Republican provided no evidence to support his claim. Burr’s office did not immediately respond to a request for comment from The Hill.

Gaetz has been critical of Burr since it was reported earlier this year that the senator sold off stock shortly after being briefed on the economic impact of the coronavirus.

The congressman on Friday defended his lease arrangement on Twitter while pushing back on the story, claiming he worked in the interest of taxpayers by getting a “bargain” on rent.