CLOSE

It's important to ensure your car is receiving the proper care even if it will be mostly idle. (Photo: Blair Bunting)

With stay-at-home orders still in place, many Arizonans' cars are going unused for long periods of time. For some, this has raised questions about how best to care for their vehicles.

What do I do about insurance? Should I change the way I care for my car?

According to Jesse Campbell, staying at home shouldn't get in the way of your car receiving proper care.

Campbell works with the auto tech instructors at Universal Technical Institute’s Maricopa County campus in Avondale.

“This would be the prime opportunity to get maintenance done, while you’re not using it every day,” Campbell said. “You’re sitting at home for a month. Why not do some car maintenance?”

Whether you’re working from home or just staying at home, here’s how to make sure your car is in good shape when you get back on the road.

Care for your battery

A car mechanic replaces a battery. (Photo: joebelanger/Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Even if you won’t be going anywhere, make sure to turn your car on at least once a week.

“The battery is probably your biggest risk because of the modern electronics in the vehicle,” Campbell said. “Start the car and let it run for at least 15-20 minutes once a week.”

Going too long without doing so could mean a dead battery next time you try to turn your car on, Campbell said.

He said turning your car on periodically is also good for more than just your battery.

“The charging system brings (the battery) back up to a good, healthy voltage,” Campbell said. “This circulates lubricants through the engine and the transmission.”

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Check your tire pressure

It’s important to keep track of the air pressure in your tires even if your car is just sitting at home.

According to Campbell, the difference between a tire with optimal air pressure and one that is too low is about four pounds per square inch (PSI), with most tires losing about one PSI a month.

“Tires naturally lose air as they sit," he said.

This will be especially important as Arizona temperatures start to heat up.

“Low tire pressure combined with hot weather can lead to tire treads separating on freeways,” Campbell said, making reference to tire debris left on Arizona highways as a result of a blowout, otherwise known as road “gators.”

Doing regular check-ups on your car can also prevent small problems from becoming bigger ones.

“A small oil leak sitting around for a month can lead to you losing quite a bit of oil,” Campbell said.

Overall, Campbell said, taking proper care of your car while it’s sitting idle is an easy way to keep getting the most out of it when you get back on the road.

Do you still need insurance?

Some insurance providers are offering different alternatives to provide economic relief for policyholders going through financial hardships.

The Arizona Department of Insurance has urged insurance providers to work towards ensuring that policies across all areas of coverage remain active for the duration of the crisis, even if the customer has trouble paying.

"Arizona is working to ensure those facing financial hardship because of COVID-19 get the support they need to get through this," Gov. Doug Ducey said in a statement. "We have called on insurers across the state to work with consumers during this health emergency to make sure Arizonans do not lose the coverage they depend on."

AAA Arizona announced it would be issuing a 20% refund on monthly premiums for any customer with an active policy as of April 30. This will apply to two months of monthly premiums.

AAA customers do not need to take any action to receive their refund and can expect to have it by May 31.

A number of other national car insurance providers are offering similar discounts, recognizing that there are fewer drivers on the road, resulting in fewer costly crashes for insurers to pay for.

The Consumer Federation of America is tracking and ranking discount and refund programs from insurers. It estimates that insurers will be refunding or crediting drivers more than $6.5 billion over the next two months.

Whether you're wondering about your home, auto or health insurance policy, contact your provider for more information about the financial relief options at your disposal.

Have other questions?

The Arizona Republic staff has answered some frequently asked questions, but we know that as things change, new questions might arise. We want to know what is on your mind and we want to be as accurate, helpful and clear in our coverage as possible.

What are you wondering? Have you seen something you don't understand? How has the new coronavirus affected your daily life? We've got a helpline established here, and our team will get you answers as best we can.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona/2020/04/18/arizona-what-do-auto-insurance-maintenance-during-coronavirus-at-home/5142481002/