Fox News anchor Chris Wallace Christopher (Chris) WallacePelosi to appear on 'Fox News Sunday' for first time since 2017 Trump lashes out at New York Times over report on coronavirus response Fox News host hits back at Trump over Chris Wallace criticism: 'Enough' MORE will interview Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiLady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Trump criticizes Pelosi over stalemate on small business loan funds MORE (D-Calif.) on Sunday, marking her first interview on the network since 2017, according to a release from Fox.

Pelosi will join "Fox News Sunday" to "discuss the current state of the U.S. amid the coronavirus pandemic, negotiations to revive the small business loan program and much more," per the network.

Wallace has scored several interviews with top Democrats in recent months, including the party's presumptive presidential nominee former Vice President Joe Biden Joe BidenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move GOP online donor platform expanded to state level Overnight Energy: US oil prices hit 18-year-low | Green groups, coal companies attack EPA power plant rollback from both sides | EPA weighs lifting ethanol requirements for oil refiners MORE; Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump inflames red state-blue state coronavirus divide Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (I-Vt.); former South Bend, Ind., Mayor Pete Buttigieg Pete ButtigiegBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Pelosi to appear on 'Fox News Sunday' for first time since 2017 Top Sanders adviser launches Hispanic-focused super PAC MORE; House Intelligence Committee Chairman Adam Schiff Adam Bennett SchiffPelosi to appear on 'Fox News Sunday' for first time since 2017 Krystal and Saagar debate former Clinton advisor on Biden's electability Schiff throws support behind Biden MORE (D-Calif.) and Sen. Amy Klobuchar Amy KlobucharBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Key senators negotiating potential deal to allow remote Senate hearings Democrats press USDA to create rural coronavirus task force MORE (D-Minn.).

ADVERTISEMENT

Pelosi called for more widespread testing for COVID-19 on Thursday after President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE and the White House coronavirus task force announced its plan for a phased reopening of the economy predicated on various criteria being met on a local case-by-case basis.

"I heard one of them say: 'Well, people will die — or we'll open up the economy and people will die — so that's the lesser of two evils,'" Pelosi said, referring to remarks from a GOP congressman.

"No, it's the greater of two evils to open up the economy in a way that is not science-based, that isn't based on the health and the well-being of the American people," she added.

Pelosi's last appearance on Fox News in July 2017 was also with Wallace. She was the House minority leader at the time.