For some middle and high schoolers, wearing a Maga hat has become not only a sign of their political allegiance, but an act of rebellion. There are many local news reports about children being asked to remove them, or claiming they’ve been abused for wearing one. Washington DC, an overwhelmingly Democratic city, often encounters an influx of children on school trips in Maga hats, making residents bristle.

Maddie Mueller, a student at Clovis North high school in Fresno, California, is the latest example. She was prohibited from wearing her Maga hat by teachers, so she’s now suing the school district, claiming she has a first amendment right to wear it.

School officials say they simply don’t allow certain logos as part of the dress code, but Mueller has responded saying, “to my knowledge, Trump is not a logo. It’s a last name. It’s just our president.

“How is being a patriot in trying to show pride in your country – how is that inappropriate?”

Soon after the story broke, Mueller made an appearance on Laura Ingraham’s Fox News show, claiming that the school was discriminating against her because she “checked today” and saw four Hillary Clinton T-shirts, a Bernie Sanders hat, an Obama shirt and seven LGBTQ rainbow flag hats. Ingraham asked Mueller if these items were worn “in classrooms” and she said yes.

Ingraham said she had no reason to question Mueller’s claim that she saw four students in Clinton hats, two years after the presidential election, or that she had checked to make sure they were still wearing them in class. She did call her “edgy” and “brave”.

In January, students from Covington Catholic high school on a trip to Washington made headlines after they were filmed apparently taunting a group of indigenous Americans. They were widely criticised by most of the media, but Fox and Friends painted them as victims of cruel online bullying simply because they displayed their political beliefs. Before that, a Texas 16-year-old tweeted about having his hat stolen and a drink thrown at him, Trump himself sent over a Maga hat.

Kelly Avants, the chief communication officer for the Clovis Unified school district, told a CBS affiliate that the school’s dress code “is for kids to feel safe at school and free of distractions so they can focus on learning”.

The district’s dress code is available online and states that no hats or caps may be worn inside classrooms and offices. It also bans many logos and brands, and specifically bans clothing or apparel that can be worn for the purpose of “harassing, threatening, or intimidating others”.