ASSOCIATED PRESS

A raft of new polls has come out in recent weeks about taxing the rich, keyed to, among other things, Elizabeth Warren’s wealth tax proposal and suggestions from other politicians that the top marginal rate be raised on top earners.

A good place to begin to look at public reactions is Gallup’s trend data. The pollster asks whether different groups of individuals are paying their fair share, too little, or too much in federal taxes. “Upper-income people” is one of Gallup’s categories. In 1992, 77% said upper-income people were paying too little. In Gallup’s 2018 question, 62% gave that response. The “too little” response has hovered in the low sixties for the past seven years. Twenty-six percent in 2018 said upper-income people pay their fair share, and around 10% said they pay too much. Other polls paint a similar picture.

But that’s not the end of the story. Another Gallup question asks about whether the US benefits from having a class of rich people. Fifty-eight percent agreed last year, down barely from 62% who gave that response nearly 30 years ago in 1990. In 2018, 43% of Democrats, 57% of independents, and 81% of Republicans said the country benefitted. Gallup reported that the partisan divide has widened since 2012, with a drop in Democrats’ views about the benefit, while Republican views have remained stable.

Many polls reveal ambivalence about how the rich contribute to society. In a September 2018 Harvard/Harris online survey, 70%, agreed that Wall Street was absolutely essential because it provides the money businesses must have for investment. An equally robust 69% in another question said that most people on Wall Street would be willing to break the law if they believed they could make a lot of money and get away with it.

The polls can’t tell us what is driving the current push for higher taxes. The proposals aren’t new. Nor are poll responses which usually show support for increasing taxes on the rich. It’s possible that politicians such as Bernie Sanders or Elizabeth Warren lit a spark with discussions of inequality, spiking public and pollsters’ interest. A new more liberal Democratic House could also be driving attention. Partisan divisions on many questions are deeper today. Republicans and Democrats differ profoundly, for example, on why someone is rich. Sixty-two percent of Democrats in a September Pew Research Center poll said it was because the person had advantages in life. Seventy-one percent of Republicans said it was because the person worked harder than most other people. Not quite mirror images, but close. Nineteen percent of Democrats in a January Gallup question were satisfied with the way income and wealth are distributed in the US; 65% of Republicans were.

So how appealing are a wealth tax or raising marginal rates? Several new polls suggest that a wealth tax is more popular than raising tax rates. In a late January Economist/YouGov online survey, 50% supported an annual wealth tax (41% were opposed). More Republicans supported than opposed the wealth tax in this poll, but not in other polls. In an early February Morning Consult/Politico poll, 61% of registered voters favored a wealth tax and 20% were opposed. In the poll, a majority of Democrats, 51%, and Republicans, 55%, had not heard much or anything at all about it. In the new CNN poll, 54% favored and 39% opposed a new tax on “wealth in addition to the income tax which would only apply to those who net worth is $50 million or more.” In this poll, 56 percent of Republicans were opposed (36% were in favor). Seventy-four percent supported a wealth tax in a new online Hill/HarrisX poll.

In the Economist/YouGov poll, 44 percent supporting adding a 70% tax bracket on income (33% were opposed). In CNN’s poll, 41% favored raising the top rate to 70% while 52% were opposed. In Morning Consult’s poll, 45% supported this move.

In questions about tax policy, income thresholds matter. Seventy percent of registered voters in a January Fox News poll favored increasing tax rates only on families earning over $10 million a year, 65% favored raising them only on families making over $1 million, and fewer than half, 44%, favored a hike on families earning $250,000 a year.

As the debate proceeds, understanding Americans’ views about taxes is taxing, but the public’s general instincts are clear.