OCTOBER 2017 Wendy Williams made major headlines over one year ago after passing out on live TV during her Halloween episode. She later claimed she was just overheated and dehydrated in her Statue of Liberty costume. Photo credit: Getty Images

FEBRUARY 2018 Less than a year later, Wendy — who at the time was known for rarely missing shows — canceled a myriad of episodes due to “flu-like symptoms.” Soon after, on February 21, 2018, she announced her three-week hiatus due to complications with her hyperthyroidism and Graves’ disease. “My doctor has prescribed — are you ready? — three weeks of vacation,” she shared with viewers at the time. “I was pissed. Encore performances, really?” Photo credit: Getty Images

December 17, 2018 Late last year, Wendy abruptly missed an episode, but returned one day later. “There’s no way I could have done yesterday’s show,” she said upon her return. “I was all about the medical care yesterday, from one doctor to the other.” Wendy added, “I’m on the mend. I don’t need an operation. They tell me I’m very healthy for, um … a person after 50. I don’t need an operation, and I’m not wearing a hard cast. But I do have a sling ... Staff, crew, the show will go on!” Photo credit: Getty Images

December 20, 2018 In another episode later that week, Wendy was called out for slurring her words on-air! “I sincerely apologize if you feel that today’s show was less than stellar . I’m on your TV screens every day wanting to spread laughter, entertainment and cheer. As I reported earlier in the week, I have a hairline fracture on my upper arm, which hurts like hell,” she wrote on Instagram. “I’ve never broken a bone or experienced a fracture in my life. In the key place where the fracture is, and trying to scurry around and do too much, I am now paying the price.” Photo credit: Getty Images

JANUARY 2019 Around the holidays, Wendy took a planned break from the show, and on January 3, she announced she’d be returning live on January 7. Just a few days before January 7, however, she followed up by shifting her comeback to a full week later — January 14. “After fracturing her shoulder, Wendy is on the mend and wants to return pain-free and be 200%, delivering the best show that millions of viewers tune-in to watch,” a post on her Instagram read at the time. Photo credit: Getty Images

JANUARY 2019 The show was then delayed for a second time on January 10. At that time, she said she’d return to the small screen for the first time in 2019 on January 21. On January 18, however, she delayed her return for a third time. “As Wendy Williams Hunter previously shared, she fractured her shoulder and has been on the mend,” said the Williams Hunter family statement. “Over the past few days, Wendy has experienced complications regarding her Graves’ Disease that will require treatment. Wendy will be under the strict supervision of her physicians, and as part of her care, there will be significant time spent in the hospital. Despite her strong desire to return, she is taking a necessary, extended break from her show to focus on her personal and physical well-being. Wendy thanks everyone in advance for their well-wishes and for respecting her and The Hunter family privacy during this time.” No return date was given at that time. Photo credit: Getty Images

FEBRUARY 2019 Since Wendy’s mysterious departure, a plethora of guest co-hosts have been filling in for her, including Nick Cannon, Jerry O’Connell, and Keke Palmer. Photo credit: Getty Images

FEBRUARY 2019 “It has been like a vacation having guest hosts. Everyone is laughing and smiling and working together. We all had gotten so used to walking on eggshells around Wendy and Kevin, we forgot what a fun work environment was,” a source spilled to RadarOnline.com. Photo credit: Getty Images

FEBRUARY 2019 As The National ENQUIRER also previously reported, the show is now moving on without her ! "She is 100% not involved. Every decision is now being made with zero conversations with Wendy," a source shared. "At first they were keeping her and Kevin [Hunter] in the loop. Getting their approval on replacement hosts and guests. Now they are not even ccing them.” Photo credit: Getty Images

FEBRUARY 2019 “At first the staff was worried about losing their jobs,” the insider continued. “Now it looks like the show can survive without Wendy, and a lot of people don’t want her to return.” Photo credit: Getty Images

FEBRUARY 2019 However, Wendy shocked the world and her staff when she announced her triumphant return to the talk show on Thursday, February 21. “Wendy Williams is an incredible talent with the most unique voice in daytime. We can’t wait to welcome her back to her iconic purple chair on the set of her show on Monday, March 4,” a statement from Debmar-Mercury read. Since Wendy has been absent, a myriad of co-hosts have stood in her place, including Nick Cannon, Keke Palmer, and more. “We so appreciate all of the guest hosts and panelists who filled in for Wendy during this time. These people are, and always will be, true family to the show,” the note continued. “And we want to thank all of the loyal and supportive fans who have been with us for 10 years now.” Photo credit: Getty Images

MARCH 2019 On Monday, March 4, Wendy returned to her highly-anticipated talk show after much anticipation. During her first appearance in over two months, she addressed those cheating rumors and marriage woes. "I want to shout out to my husband. I'm still wearing my ring," she shared. "Believe me you, when you've been with somebody for 28 years ... married for 25 years ... we know each other. He's my best friend, he's my lover, he's all this and he's all that. I know what you've been seeing and I know what the streets have been talking about." "I am still very much in love with my husband," she added. "Anybody who's been married for 5 minutes or 500 years, you know marriages have ebbs and flows. Marriages are not easy. Don't ask me about mine until you see this [ring] gone and it ain't going anywhere—not in this lifetime." Photo credit: Getty Images