On the evening of the 2016 presidential election, leftists and Democrats, almost to a person, decided that they hated Donald Trump more than they loved America.

Reaction to the coronavirus outbreak is the latest proof of that.

Throughout the crisis, Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., suggested that it may have originated in a Wuhan, China lab. Mainstream media consistently took China's side.

A February 17 Washington Post headline screamed, "Tom Cotton keeps repeating a coronavirus conspiracy theory that was already debunked."

On Wednesday, however, Fox News White House correspondent John Roberts reported that there's increasing evidence that Cotton was right all along.

"Multiple sources are telling Fox News today that the United States government now has high confidence that while the coronavirus is a naturally occurring virus, it emanated from a virology lab in Wuhan," Roberts said, adding that it was more-than-likely accidentally released.

"That because of [lax] safety protocols, an intern was infected who later infected her boyfriend, and then went to the wet market in Wuhan where it began to spread."

Even if it wasn't released intentionally, the Chinese Communist Party intentionally covered it up. They quarantined Wuhan from the rest of China to protect themselves, but permitted international travel to continue and infect the rest of the world.

Chinese state media early on denounced Trump as racist and xenophobic for both ordering an early travel ban and referring to COVID-19 as the Chinese virus.

And Democrats and media figures took China's side. Now that Trump's actions were proven correct, they're changing gears and saying he didn't act fast enough.

On Wednesday, The Washington Post's Jennifer Rubin opined that "Trump's inaction has a staggering toll."

She went on to claim that "the Trump toll, when we are done, will likely include tens of thousands of unnecessary deaths, massive unemployment, trillions of dollars more in debt and trillions of dollars in lost wealth not to mention emotional hardship and educational disruption."

Dan Crenshaw, a U.S. Navy SEAL officer-turned-Texas Republican Congressman, crushed Rubin's claim in a 10-tweet thread that began, "STOP. REWRITING. HISTORY."

At Thursday's White House Coronavirus Task Force press briefing, the president outlined a three-phase plan to get the wheels of commerce and industry turning again.

"A national shutdown is not a sustainable long-term solution to preserve the health of our citizens," Trump said.

But working against this, people on the left want to use the pandemic to destroy the U.S. economy.

Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel, a former Obama administration official, has been pushing for a shutdown lasting as long as 18 months.

Most recently, Democratic Reps. Tim Ryan of Ohio and Ro Khanna of California introduced a bill that would give nearly every American $2,000 a month.

Between Emanuel's extended shutdown and Ryan and Khanna‘s proposed "Emergency Money for the People Act," the economy would collapse and the United States would be another Venezuela inside a year.

Finally, Taiwan warned the World Health Organization (WHO) as early as December 31 that COVID-19 was transmittable from person-to-person. The organization ignored this information and instead reported mainland China's claim that it wasn't transmittable.

Because of the WHO's continued role as China's co-conspirator in the coverup, Trump announced plans to cut off WHO funding.

Rep. Gil Cisneros, a California Democrat, called the move "dangerous," adding, "Pulling funding from the World Health Organization (WHO) jeopardizes the health of the United States and countries around the world."

In truth, the WHO already jeopardized "the health of the United States and countries around the world" by acting as China's co-conspirator.

Microsoft founder Bill Gates also objected, claiming that "Halting funding for the World Health Organization during a world health crisis is as dangerous as it sounds. Their work is slowing the spread of COVID-19 and if that work is stopped no other organization can replace them. The world needs @WHO now more than ever."

In truth, the WHO helped create the "worldwide health crisis."

I'm old enough to remember when then-President George W. Bush stood atop a pile of rubble that used to be the World Trade Center and brought a nation together armed with only a megaphone.

The United States had been attacked and nearly 3,000 American lives were lost.

Today more than 11 times that number of American lives have been lost because of this latest attack, and the body count increases every day.

Trump has warned Americans for decades that China has been taking advantage of the United States. He ran and was elected on his promise to hold China's feet to the fire.

But because of the left's visceral hatred for the president, they stand with China over the White House. They would rather see Trump destroyed than America succeed, and that's unacceptable.

Michael Dorstewitz is a retired lawyer and has been a frequent contributor to BizPac Review and Liberty Unyielding. He is also a former U.S. Merchant Marine officer and an enthusiastic Second Amendment supporter, who can often be found honing his skills at the range. To read more of his reports — Click Here Now.