Congressman Mark Meadows (R-NC) referred Michael Cohen for criminal investigation during Wednesday’s explosive Congressional hearing.

Michael Cohen, a convicted liar who was just disbarred, testified in a public Congressional hearing to the Oversight Committee on Wednesday.

Mr. Cohen continued to lie under oath on Wednesday. He has nothing to lose — he is already going to prison for 36 months for lying to Congressional investigators.

Rep. Meadows ripped into Cohen and accused him of violating the Foreign Agents Registration Act.

TRENDING: THE END OF AN ERA: Drudge Goes Full Leftie - Loses President Trump-- Go to Pro-Trump News Instead

Meadows accused Michael Cohen of “illegal lobbying activity” and not properly disclosing contracts with foreign companies during a heated exchange on Wednesday.

Michael Cohen defended himself by saying his contacts were only with privately owned companies, not government entities.

WATCH:

BOMBSHELL: Rep. Mark Meadows makes a criminal referral on Michael Cohen for illegal lobbying activities. It didn’t take long for Cohen to get himself caught up in more illegal activities that he could be prosecuted for by the DOJ. pic.twitter.com/HiiqOAq0KD — Femme Fatale (@RealBasedMAGA) February 27, 2019

MEADOWS: I just entered a referral for criminal investigation of Michael Cohen, who violated the Foreign Agents Registration Act by illegally lobbying on behalf of foreign entities without registering

Cohen talks about “blind loyalty.” His real blind loyalty? It’s to the almighty dollar.

I just entered a referral for criminal investigation of Michael Cohen, who violated the Foreign Agents Registration Act by illegally lobbying on behalf of foreign entities without registering Cohen talks about "blind loyalty." His real blind loyalty? It's to the almighty dollar. — Mark Meadows (@RepMarkMeadows) February 27, 2019

Michael Cohen also lied about wanting a White House job — even fake news CNN called him out on his whopper of a lie.

The Democrats and Deep State purposely dragged Michael Cohen out to testify in a dog-and-pony show to harass President Trump while he is in Vietnam negotiating the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.

Michael Cohen is scheduled to report to prison on May 6th but in the meantime, the Dems are using him to harass President Trump.