CLOSE

The Navajo Nation is drafting an order that would extend its 57-hour weekend curfew to the next two weekends of April and the first weekend of May, officials announced on Tuesday.

In the first move of its kind in Arizona, the Navajo Nation announced on April 6 a 57-hour curfew over Easter weekend to curb the spread of the new coronavirus.

Navajo Nation President Jonathan Nez announced the tribe's plans to extend its curfew on Tuesday during a live online town hall.

Navajo Nation spokesperson Jared Touchin confirmed the plans to The Arizona Republic, stating that the order was still being drafted and would be finalized in the coming days.

Nez said in a press release that "the 57-hour weekend curfew was effective in reducing the numbers of people that went into the public" and that they were "developing a new order to implement similar curfews for the next three weekends for the entire Navajo Nation."

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

Aside from essential employees with official identification and people with emergencies, Navajo Nation residents were ordered to stay home over the weekend. Anyone who violated the tribe's curfew order could be issued citations, including a fine up to $1,000 and 30 days in jail, officials previously announced.

The Navajo Police Department enforced the tribe's 57-hour curfew by setting up checkpoints in various communities and issuing more than 170 citations to violators. Since March 30, the Navajo Nation has also had a nightly curfew requiring residents to stay home between 8 p.m. and 5 a.m. every day.

The police department said five of its employees, including four officers, had tested positive for COVID-19 by Tuesday. The department was notified of its first two COVID-19 positive employees on Monday, it said.

On Tuesday, the Navajo Nation reported 838 known COVID-19 cases — an increase of 25 positive cases since Monday. It also announced 33 deaths, which was five more than Monday.

The report included 3,107 negative test results as of Tuesday.

Nez told The Republic on Monday that they won't know for a while if the curfew was effective in curbing the spread of the new coronavirus, in part because, due to the testing process, the tribe's data on the number of cases reflects what was true about two days earlier. Also, it can take up to 14 days to present symptoms of COVID-19.

The Navajo Area Indian Health Service this week was implementing rapid COVID-19 testing that would produce quicker results, according to a press release from the Navajo Nation. Nez said during the town hall to expect a spike in the tribe's number of positive COVID-19 cases because of the quicker results.

“The numbers will rise, but we will also rise to the challenge. It’s going to get more challenging before it gets better," Vice President Myron Lizer said in a statement included in the press release.

"The sooner people choose to stay home more, the sooner we will beat the virus and the sooner we can begin to heal," he said. "We continue to pray for everyone, especially those families who lost loved ones. We ask God to comfort all of you and give you strength."

Reach the reporter at chelsea.curtis@arizonarepublic.com or follow her on Twitter @curtis_chels.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/arizona-breaking/2020/04/14/navajo-nation-set-57-hour-curfews-next-3-weekends/2994308001/