'Mom, what's happening to our city?': My apocalyptic bike ride on Valencia with my son

Puerto Alegra on San Francisco's Valencia Street was temporarily closed on March 19, 2020, amid a shelter-in-place order to prevent the spread of COVID-19. Puerto Alegra on San Francisco's Valencia Street was temporarily closed on March 19, 2020, amid a shelter-in-place order to prevent the spread of COVID-19. Photo: A. Graff Photo: A. Graff Image 1 of / 47 Caption Close 'Mom, what's happening to our city?': My apocalyptic bike ride on Valencia with my son 1 / 47 Back to Gallery

My 15-year-old son and I ventured out of our house late Thursday evening to ride our bikes down Valencia Street, the beating heart of San Francisco's Mission District.

What we found was a city we didn't recognize.

The colorful, lively street our family often strolls to on balmy Friday nights for tacos and tapioca tea was shockingly changed. Its buzz—the whir of the bicycle traffic, the honking of the Lyft drivers, the chatter and laughter of groups drinking beers at cafe tables—was unfamiliarly quiet. There were definitely people out—lots of lone skateboarders, mask-wearing people on speed walks and runs, some cyclists, tons of police—but there was an overall hush that you typically only experience if you walk the street early Sunday morning.

Many businesses were boarded up, a sight that was especially unsettling to my son. "Mom, what's happening to our city? Why are there boards on all the windows?"

Flour + Water's new pizzeria on the typically bustling corner of 18th and Valencia was covered in boards. Only two months ago in January, I remember trying to get a table at the restaurant and being told there was an hour-long wait. Plywood also covered the windows of West of Pecos, Puerto Alegre, Stonemill Matcha Cafe and Locanda.

Many of these restaurants posted signs on their doors assuring people they'll reopen when the shelter-in-place mandate, ordering all restaurants to remain closed except for take-out, is lifted. But the reality is that, amid the coronavirus crisis gripping the city, some will never open their doors again.

Earlier this week, Locanda's owner Annie Stoll told me she and her husband, Craig, would likely never reopen the Valencia Street restaurant. They're keeping their Delfina pizzerias open for takeout, but have temporarily closed Delfina restaurant on 18th Street with plans to reopen.

Even San Francisco's go-to spot for fresh Greek fare, Souvla, was boarded up with signs reading, "This restaurant contains absolutely no cash; no computers, iPads, etc.; no liquor, beer or wine; no fresh food. Please let us hibernate in peace."

"Why do they have those signs, Mom? Would people really break into the business to look for food?"

Many restaurants also had signs in their windows and sandwich boards on the sidewalk advertising to-go and delivery meals.

In the take-out window of Burma Love, a worker wearing a mask passed paper bags of food to people driving for the city's popular online delivery services Caviar and Postmates.

Dancing Yak was also open, along with We Be Sushi, Curry Up Indian Street Food, Little Star Pizza, Mau, Smitten Ice Cream, Limon, Mixt, Hawker Fair and many more. I rode by thinking that I would be sure to order take-out from them all to offer support.

At Boba Guys on 19th Street right off Valencia a group was gathered outside—everyone standing six feet apart—ordering tea drinks.

"Mom, please, can I get one?"

How could I say no? My son has been remarkably motivated and helpful while cooped up at home, doing his homework, tutoring his 6-year-old sister in math, studying for his driver's-ed test, doing his dishes and serenading the family with his violin playing. He hadn't seen his friends in over a week and had hardly complained.

I pulled out the hand sanitizer and made him clean his hands before and after ordering a drink.

We passed multiple shuttered schools: my youngest child's school, Buena Vista Horace Mann; Synergy; and San Francisco Friends School. On the front entrance of the Millennium School, which is housed in a former church, the words "F— Corona-2 " were scrawled in graffiti. I couldn't agree more with this sentiment. Here I was on a bike ride with my son, who hadn't been in school for four days and who had no clue when he would return. I was angry at this virus putting all of these children out of school, though I understood the need to stay home to prevent spread and protect the community.

For the past week, I've been holed up inside my home, writing articles for SFGATE, tracking new coronavirus cases, interpreting the language of shelter-in-place orders and interviewing infectious disease experts. Except to walk the dog at Dolores Park, I've generally stayed home, working 10-plus-hour days while attempting to home-school three children.

Suddenly, I was outside in this new shelter-in-place world I'd been writing about for days, stepping into the fresh air and noticing that the sky was especially clear. Was it the recent rain or had the air pollution already improved with fewer cars on the road? What my son and I saw on that bike ride was a huge wake-up call that our lives might not be the same for a long time. Our dear city was changing, struggling, enduring, supporting.

"Mom, what's going to happen? Will it all come back?"

I said it would come back but I couldn't tell him when.

:::

Below is a list of restaurants offering takeout and delivery on Valencia Street:





If you know of a business on Valencia that's open and not included on this list, please send an email to Fernando.Martinez@sfgate.com and we will add.

Arizmendi Baked goods and pizza.

Aslam's Rasoi Northern Indian and Pakistani food.

Burma Love Burmese cuisine.

Crepe House III Crêpes, sandwiches & house specials.

Curry Up Now Street Indian food.

Dancing Yak Nepalese starters and entrees.

Esperpento Long running Spanish restaurant.

Hawker Fare Lao Isaan eatery.

Little Star Pizza Pizzeria.

Limon Rotisserie Family-owned Peruvian restaurant.

Loló Traditional and unique Mexican food.

Mau Casual Vietnamese eats.

Mercado de Brasil A market with Brazilian food and ingredients.

Mixt Eco-friendly salad joint.

Papalote Taqueria with burritos, salsas, and more.

Pi Bar New York style pizza pies and craft beers.

Senor Sisig Fusion Filipino food.

Serrano's Pizza and Pasta A classic pizzeria with toppings galore.

Smitten Ice Cream Locally produced ice cream shop.

Udupi Palace Vegetarian Indian food.

UPFORDAYZ Coffee, tea, and juice.

Venga Empanadas Argentinian-style baked empanadas.

We Be Sushi Japanese spot with sushi, rice bowls, and udon.

Amy Graff is a digital editor with SFGATE. Email her: agraff@sfgate.com.