Good evening, and welcome to our daily roundup of the latest developments on the coronavirus pandemic in Australia. This is Josh Taylor bringing you the main stories on Thursday 2 April.

Death toll rises to 24

The total number of deaths of patients confirmed to have coronavirus has now reached 24 in Australia after two deaths in Victoria and one in Queensland.

The total number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Australia stands at 5,108, up 244 on the previous day.

Free childcare for parents working during pandemic

The federal government is funding half the revenue for 13,000 childcare centres in a $1.6bn package to ensure parents who are working during the pandemic can send their child to childcare. This is on top of the jobkeeper wage subsidy, and is estimated to cover around 1 million workers needing childcare for their children.

The existing means testing arrangements are no longer in place, so anyone who is working can access childcare during the pandemic. Those who have pulled their children out of childcare since 23 March can have the gap fee waived to put their children back into childcare after the pandemic.

Australia's strict new coronavirus social distancing rules explained: state by state guidelines Read more

Industrial relations changes

IR minister Christian Porter announced temporary changes to modern awards for the period of the crisis, as agreed upon by business and unions. Three of the 121 modern awards were changed in restaurants, hospitality and the clerk award. Workers can now be reclassified as performing one type of duty to performing another, and workers can take longer amounts of leave at reduced pay rates.

Workers can now also take two weeks of unpaid pandemic leave.

Ruby Princess now accounts for over 500 confirmed cases

On Tuesday we revealed that there were at least 229 cases outside NSW linked to the cruise ship – according to the health departments of every state and territory. That number will inevitably be higher today, as we’re still waiting for the other states to release their latest numbers.

But as of Wednesday, there were 78 in South Australia, and as of Monday, there were 70 in Queensland, 43 in Western Australia, 22 in the ACT, 18 in Victoria, three in Tasmania and two in the Northern Territory. Add that to NSW’s announced 340, and you get 576.

Queensland and WA border closures

From midnight tonight, Queensland will now turn away anyone who is not a resident, or does not fall under one of the exempt reasons, from entering the state. This is a change from the previous policy where people were forced to self-isolate for 14 days upon arrival. The Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, announced on that WA would also be moving to a “hard border” from Sunday night, saying the move would make his state “an island within an island”.

NSW lockdown to last at least 90 days, police confirm

NSW police commissioner Mick Fuller has confirmed that the current restrictions in place in the state will remain in operation until the end of June, but after that time he is hoping to relax them, depending on the success in reducing the spread of coronavirus.

Overseas, stranded and in lockdown: how Australians are struggling to get home Read more

Queensland and Victoria clarify visiting arrangements

Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has acknowledged that the restrictions on gatherings might make people feel quite isolated, particularly those who live alone, and has said people who have one or two friends over, observing social distancing, would not be in violation of the new rules. But she said you shouldn’t have strangers around.

Victoria is not currently being as generous, but the chief health officer, Brett Sutton, overnight agreed to allow people who do not live with their partner to be allowed to visit them or have them over.

National cabinet meets on Friday

On the agenda includes rent relief and what to do about Year 12 exams this year. There has been widespread reports that the government’s approach of suggesting renters and landlords “work it out between yourselves” hasn’t been too successful, with residential landlords demanding to know information such as whether tenants will dip into their super, while commercial landlords are not willing to provide “meaningful relief” to stores forced to shut as a result of the restrictions, according to Retail Food Group.

Doctors call for release of refugees in detention

More than 1,200 doctors have signed a letter calling on the government to release asylum seekers being held in detention, including those in hotels who were brought to Australia under the medevac legislation.

Doctors and advocacy groups have been in discussions with the minister and his department for more than a week, but these talks have broken down, sources have told the Guardian, with a refusal from the government to consider releasing significant numbers of asylum seekers and refugees into the community temporarily.

What you need to know: get the most important information from some of our key explainers

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest news from across the Guardian’s global network.