CLOSE

Piece by piece, the Prescott Valley Motel neon sign that glowed for decades was taken down by a crane this month, making way for a Circle K gas station to open where the motel once stood.

The people who paid for the sign's removal hope it won't be long before the landmark will be back up in Prescott Valley.

"The sign's older than the town, and we just don’t have a lot of historic things," said real estate broker Wade Crandell, who provided most of the money needed to pay for the sign's removal.

"It’s a cool, iconic sign. Everybody knows it," Crandell said. "I just couldn’t see it just get torn down and not get used for something."

After much discussion among the construction company building the Circle K, the town of Prescott Valley, the Arizona Preservation Foundation and Crandell, the Googie-inspired motel sign was taken down on April 1. Now the pieces are sitting in Dale Johnson's backyard, waiting to be restored to present-day standards.

MORE THINGS TO DO: For restaurant reviews, travel tips, concert picks and more, subscribe to azcentral.com.

Googie architecture and design, with its futuristic and Atomic Age influences, was popular from the mid-1940s to the mid-1960s.

"The idea is to keep it as-is, that patina look," Johnson, founder and owner of Signs Plus, told The Arizona Republic. Signs Plus, which has locations in Prescott Valley and Phoenix, was hired to remove and store the sign.

"The cabinets themselves are not in bad shape," Johnson said. "There's maybe a little bit of surface rust."

While the structural and electrical engineering need to be improved, he said, the neon looked good, and nothing was broken inside. Usually, a sign as old as this one would have bird carcasses or dung inside.

"The way they put together the pipe graduations, that needs to be improved upon," Johnson said. "If the sign goes back up, we’re going to use structural engineering and bring it up to today’s codes and standards."

Why the sign had to go

After about 50 years in business, the Prescott Valley Motel closed in 2018. In fall 2019, the motel and Y-Not Lounge were demolished to make room for a new Circle K.

The sign could not remain since it is not up to code. There was interest in preserving or redesigning the sign, but multiple parties deemed it financially unfeasible.

The town looked into repurposing the landmark, but the effort stagnated when "the structural integrity of the sign was called into question,” said Larry Tarkowski, Prescott Valley’s town manager.

Circle K said in a statement to The Republic that the sign "could not be modified to comply, so it had to be taken down."

The Scottsdale-based construction company hired to build the Circle K was tasked with figuring out how to get rid of it. Alexander Building Company superintendent Jerry Russell had his daughter put the sign for sale on the Facebook Marketplace in March with a starting bid of $1.

Bids eventually reached $1,500, but the highest bidder's sale fell through. That's when the Arizona Preservation Foundation's Jim McPherson and Signs Plus stepped in.

Crandell came in later to fund "a significant portion of the cost to dismantle," which totaled $4,000, McPherson said.

"I’ve never done anything like this before," Crandell said. "I don’t know why I was so enticed by this sign, but I couldn’t see it go to waste."

What's next for the sign

Crandell, Johnson and McPherson have several ideas for repurposing the Prescott Valley Motel sign.

Their hope is for it to be included in the Valley of Lights, a holiday lights display in Fain Park every year.

First, Johnson's team will have to rewire and refurbish the sign, which could cost tens of thousands of dollars, Crandell said. He hopes Prescott Valley residents will help raise money for the project and show support on the Save the Sign PV Facebook page.

The Prescott Valley Motel sign, one of the town's most recognizable features, was taken down after around 50 years on April 1, 2020 and now awaits anew home. Several sign enthusiasts chipped in thousands of dollars to cover the cost of the work. (Photo: Dale Johnson)

Prescott Valley's community development director, Richard Parker, said putting the sign up in town would be a complex process.

"The relocation of the sign as an ornate structure any place in the Town of Prescott Valley would take either Board of Adjustments or Legislative review and approval," Parker said in an email.

Legislative review and approval would be done by the Planning Commission, Arts and Culture Board and Town Council, he wrote.

That doesn't deter the sign's owners from wanting to see it back up in its hometown.

"I know it will be a tough road, but worth it," Crandell said.

Reach the reporter at kimi.robinson@gannett.com or at 602-444-4968. Follow her on Twitter @kimirobin.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/travel/arizona/road-trips/2020/04/14/prescott-valley-motel-vintage-neon-sign-will-be-preserved/2946013001/