The women of ABC’s “The View” on Friday took turns bashing Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot for defending herself as the “face of the city” after getting a controversial haircut while other Chicagoans are being forced to stay home.

Ms. Lightfoot sparked a firestorm over the weekend after a stylist posted that she had given the mayor a haircut and included a photo of them standing side by side without wearing masks, despite a statewide stay-at-home order that shuttered salons and other nonessential businesses due to the coronavirus pandemic.

The 57-year-old mayor brushed off the backlash Monday, saying the people of Chicago are more concerned with the public health crisis than her haircut.

“As an elected official and the public face of the city, I need to make sure that I am out there and visible through this crisis,” the mayor said.

“The View” co-host Whoopi Goldberg introduced the story Friday morning with a mocking tone and joked that the mayor was “taking herself very seriously.”

“Wow,” co-host Sunny Hostin replied. “This is a public health matter and leadership comes from the top. The fact that she’s saying one thing and doing another, I just think it’s really despicable, in fact. If you’re the face of the city, then you need to look like everyone else is looking.

“Your gel nails should be grown out,” she continued. “Your roots should be showing. Your gray hair should be showing. All those things that everyone else is going through. I was really, really surprised at this from the mayor of Chicago. Really, really disappointed.”

Co-hosts Joy Behar and Meghan McCain agreed.

“I don’t think that she gets a pass,” Ms. Behar said. “We’d all like to look like Julia Roberts in the movie ‘Erin Brockovich,’ OK? I would love to look like that every day but I don’t. This is what I look like. And the roots are coming in to the point where at some point, I’m going to look like Cruella de Vil.”

Conservative co-host Meghan McCain added, “This is the world we’re living in and I don’t feel for this mayor. We’re all talk-show hosts with a little bit of vanity because we are used to working with such an incredible hair and makeup team, but it is a health crisis and we all are just going to have to have a little humility.”

CHICAGO MAYOR GETS HAIRCUT DURING PANDEMIC: Mayor Lori Lightfoot made a PSA telling the windy city that they need to have a good reason to leave the house, but residents were surprised when she made a trip to the hair salon – the co-hosts react. https://t.co/1091s9WYqN pic.twitter.com/WBgjhqIbrD — The View (@TheView) April 10, 2020

Sign up for Daily Newsletters Manage Newsletters

Copyright © 2020 The Washington Times, LLC. Click here for reprint permission.