WASHINGTON -- When Jordan Cortes’ flight from Peru touched down in Miami Saturday night, the entire plane full of U.S. citizens clapped with relief to be back on American soil after being stranded abroad for weeks due to the coronavirus pandemic.

The Texan was among several stranded abroad after the coronavirus pandemic prompted canceled flights and the closure of borders worldwide.

But even as he was headed home to The Woodlands, Cortes’ mind was still on Peru, where his wife, Monica Neciosup, and their 6-month-old baby, Ciro Cortes, are still awaiting safe transportation back home.

“There was a little bit of relief, but it sucks because my family isn’t with me,” Cortes said.

Cortes’ wife and baby are safe, staying with extended family in the capital city of Lima, but Cortes was forced to return to the U.S. so he could get back to work as a cement truck driver in order to pay rent on their apartment in the Houston suburb.

“I work my 40 hours, I get my $880 a week, and that’s how I live,” Cortes said. “I can’t be paying bills in the United States while living in Peru. It’s just too much.”

Shortly after Peru closed its borders in mid-March, officials with the U.S. Embassy in Lima told Cortes over the phone to register himself and his family with the Smart Traveler Enrollment Program and wait to be placed on a repatriation flight, he said.

The family made the decision to separate only after waiting weeks after the original call to the embassy to hear from State Department officials about a possible flight home. Cortes was offered a seat on an April 11 repatriation flight, only after The Dallas Morning News inquired about the family’s status the day before.

Neciosup and Ciro were placed on a standby list, but the couple decided against taking their newborn to the airport for a flight that wasn’t guaranteed out of fear of exposing him to the coronavirus.

“[The embassy] couldn’t give me a 100% that they were going to be able to fly,” Cortes said. “My baby is little and airports are where people congregate. It’s just a high risk, so my wife decided she’s going to wait it out a little longer.”

While the separation is hard, Cortes said he feels like his family is safer from the coronavirus in Peru than they would be in the U.S. because of the country’s strict lockdown. Residents are required to remain in their home unless they’re traveling for essential goods and carry a letter explaining where they’re going and why or risk legal trouble.

As of Friday afternoon, Peru had 12,400 confirmed cases of COVID-19, while the U.S. was quickly approaching 700,000, according to a Johns Hopkins University database.

“Things are OK [in Peru] because they’re really keeping everybody separated so the virus isn’t too bad,” Cortes said. “If things get worse, I want them back in the U.S. for the better medical attention.”

The family traveled to Lima from their home in The Woodlands on March 9 so they could introduce Ciro to Neciosup’s parents and grandparents. Their originally planned two-week vacation was thrown into chaos after Peru’s government declared a state of emergency March 15 and said it would seal its borders the next day in an effort to stop the spread of the coronavirus, providing little warning for foreigners visiting the country.

“When we left the U.S., it seemed like nothing was going on,” Cortes said. “But when we landed in Peru, there were temperature checks, and it all felt more serious.”

As of Friday, the State Department has repatriated nearly 64,000 Americans from across the world since the end of January, according to its website. Over 7,000 of them came from Peru on 46 different repatriation flights, the highest number of any country.

On Tuesday, Ian Bownlee, who leads the State Department’s repatriation task force, estimated there were still 15,000 U.S. citizens stranded abroad.

Randy Lee, a 51-year-old Dallas resident, returned to the U.S. from Peru on April 8, nearly a month after he traveled to the country alone on March 12.

Lee, like Cortes, said he was also surprised to be greeted to Peru by officials conducting temperature checks on those arriving from the U.S. because the situation didn’t seem very dire back home.

“I remember being like ‘Oh, they’re really taking it really seriously here,’” he said.

Lee tried to buy a ticket back to the U.S. shortly after the border closure was announced, but he was unsuccessful. Afterward, he booked a room in a nearby hostel and hunkered down for several weeks.

As the lockdown got more and more restrictive, Lee made the decision on April 6 to head to the U.S. Embassy in Lima and wait in a line with hundreds of other people to be placed on a standby list for a repatriation flight.

After waiting for hours, Lee got his ticket home.

While they were waiting for information on flights from the State Department, Cortes and Lee joined a Facebook group called “Americans Stuck in Peru” for information about repatriation flights.

The group provided valuable information and updates about the country’s lockdown and repatriation flights during a time Cortes said he heard little from the U.S. officials.

There are similar active groups for Americans trapped in countries around the world, including Argentina, Honduras, Bangladesh, Nepal, India, Morocco, Laos and Ecuador.

The Peru group’s 5,400 members churn out dozens of posts a day with requests for information, updates on flights and well-wishes from members who already made it back to the U.S. to those still awaiting a flight home.

A Tuesday post asking how many people in the group who are still in Peru awaiting repatriation has over 30 comments from people in individual groups ranging from one to eight people in size.

Cortes said he signed a document before leaving Peru guaranteeing he would eventually pay the cost of his ticket, but he still hasn’t heard how much it will be or when he needs to pay it by.

Since he returned to the U.S., neither Cortes nor his wife have been contacted by the U.S. Embassy in Lima about a repatriation flight for Neciosup and their baby.

“I know there’s a lot of people that still need to get back,” Cortes said. “I just hope they’re back soon. I already want to be with them again.”