Although Eric Holder hasn't officially announced a run for the presidency in 2020, the former attorney general under Barack Obama says it's time to abolish the Electoral College as the way to elect presidents.

"Time to make Electoral College a vestige of the past," Holder tweeted Tuesday.

"It's undemocratic, forces candidates to ignore majority of the voters and campaign in a small number of states. The presidency is our one national office and should be decided - directly - by the voters."

Time to make Electoral College a vestige of the past. It’s undemocratic, forces candidates to ignore majority of the voters and campaign in a small number of states. The presidency is our one national office and should be decided - directly - by the voters https://t.co/OyRbXOiBpz — Eric Holder (@EricHolder) February 26, 2019

TRENDING: Obama AG Eric Holder giddy about 'opportunity' coronavirus presents to make 'permanent' changes

In a separate tweet, supporting Colorado's move to do eliminate the current method of choosing presidents, Holder said: "Change the Electoral College by having a state's electoral votes go to the national popular vote winner - not the person who won the state. The candidate who gets the most votes - nationally - is elected. Real democracy."

A good reform measure to support. Change the Electoral College by having a state’s electoral votes go to the national popular vote winner - not the person who won the state. The candidate who gets the most votes - nationally - is elected. Real democracy. https://t.co/tPfNWdKQ46 — Eric Holder (@EricHolder) February 26, 2019

Holder's comments came under immediate fire from Nick Searcy, the actor and director of the recent film "Gosnell."

"This is tyranny," Searcy tweeted.

"Leftists like @EricHolder want to make America one party rule, just like they have in nations he admires like Cuba, Venezuela, and North Korea. That is what they are after. Don't kid yourself."

This is tyranny. Leftists like @EricHolder want to make America one party rule, just like they have in nations he admires like Cuba, Venezuela, and North Korea. That is what they are after. Don't kid yourself. https://t.co/rnu6DrcmYR — Nick Searcy, INTERNATIONAL FILM & TELEVISION STAR (@yesnicksearcy) February 26, 2019

In 2016, Donald Trump became president by a margin of 77 electoral votes, though he lost the popular tally to Hillary Clinton by some 3 million votes.

RELATED: Guv moves to give state's presidential-election power to L.A.

Holder has said his decision on seeking the Democratic nomination for the White House would come sometime in March.

But in reaction to his tweets on Tuesday, Fox News contributor Monica Crowley said: "He's running."

Follow Joe on Twitter @JoeKovacsNews