Once eccentric New York billionaire Donald Trump — a favorite media spectacle and rap music’s wealth reference of choice — added an “R” to his name and became a presidential contender, the Left decided he was a wholly different man. In fact, they continuously insisted, he was as great a failure at business as he was a champion of success as Klan leader.

He wasn’t a real estate mogul; to the contrary, he was merely a reality TV star. Snooki from Jersey Shore? Puck from The Real World, Season 1? Donald Trump? All the same.

You don’t want Honey Boo Boo running the country, do you?

But he was much worse than just a joke: He was a fanged, drooling Son of Satan, out to murder all people and destroy all things (here). He was in cahoots with Putin to rule the world, Dr. Evil-style (here). He was a yellow-haired madman who’s puffy coif hid his 666.

Despite the idiocy of the assertion, it’s shown no sign of stopping. It’s absurd; it’s outrageous; and it’s the new school of politics.

And it’s perfectly illustrated by a Saturday Night Live sketch from 1986, lampooning then-President Ronald Reagan.

Reagan was an ol’ softie — he had a grandfatherly demeanor and wrote constant love letters to his wife (For more, get the phenomenal book I Love You, Ronnie; if you want to truly discover the 40th president of the United States, you’ll find him there).

SNL spoofed Reagan in a lighthearted way; it didn’t feel mean. The program’s current political skewering of Trump — by contrast — is so ugly, it’s hard to watch. It’s not so much comedy as rage against the 2016 election.

But I guess they figure that rage is more than justified; after all, we elected Lucifer. And the SNL skit nails what they believe Beelzebub’s doing.

Enjoy.

-Alex

Relevant RedState links in this article: here and here.

See 3 more pieces from me:

Bye Bye, Miss American Piety

Footage Of Parkland Shooter Released, Reveals Murderer’s Mindset

Middle School Teacher Saves The Lives Of Students In Another School Shooting

Find all my RedState work here.

And please follow Alex Parker on Twitter and Facebook.

Thank you for reading! Please sound off in the Comments section below. For iPhone instructions, see the bottom of this page.

﻿

If you have an iPhone and want to comment, select the box with the upward arrow at the bottom of your screen; swipe left and choose “Request Desktop Site.” If it fails to automatically refresh, manually reload the page. Scroll down to the red horizontal bar that says “Show Comments.”