While so many of our spring traditions have been canceled, including the Ennis Bluebonnet Trails and festival, here’s something you can still do, with proper safe distancing: Take a drive to spend time in the fresh air visiting Texas’ official state flower. We’ve put together a bouquet of places with blossoms.

Though you’ll be outside with the blue blooms, nevertheless stay at least 6 feet away from others. Here are some other tips: Don’t trespass. Be mindful of where you park, and be careful walking along roads. Watch out for snakes. And finally: Don’t pick the bluebonnets. Though it’s not illegal, it’s just not nice. Save some springtime spirit for others to enjoy.

For even more suggested spots, visit inaturalist.org/observations. Type “bluebonnets” in the species field, then add your location to find reported sightings nearby.

Jenny Burns photographed Landry Thompson last spring in a bluebonnet field in a median on West Bethany Drive in Allen. If you take pictures this year, remember to keep a safe distance from others. (Brian Elledge / Staff Photographer)

Texas Native Park

The grounds of the George W. Bush Presidential Center, 2943 SMU Blvd., Dallas, include the 15-acre Texas Native Park, which showcases Lone Star State wildflowers and other native plants. Though the center is currently closed to the public, the trails are open for bluebonnet browsing. Admission is free, but there is a charge for parking.

Bluebonnet Trail in Plano

Patches of posies are scattered along this trail that runs east to west across Plano, just north of West Spring Creek Parkway. Some of the most bountiful blooms can be found on the east side of Custer Road, the east side of Independence Parkway, the east side of Coit Road across from Carpenter Park Recreation Center, the west side of Alma Drive across from High Point Park and the west side of Rainier Road across from Wagon Wheel Park.

Toyota Campus in Plano

Toyota’s North American headquarters on Legacy Drive between State Highway 121 and Headquarters Drive features plenty of parklike landscaping year-round. It currently includes several areas bursting with bluebonnets. With the trees and tall grasses, it’s easy to get a photograph that doesn’t look like it was shot in an office park near the highway.

West Bethany Drive in Allen

Between Alma Drive and South Watters Road in Allen, West Bethany Drive has a wide median verdant with hills, trees, thick grass and — currently — many, many pockets of bluebonnets. The annual flowering enhances an already pretty area. During this time of the year, it’s typical to see cars parked in the turnaround lanes in order for folks to snap their selfies.

More suggestions

Arbor Hills Nature Preserve Patches of bluebonnets greet visitors at the entrance to the Plano park on Parker Road west of Midway Road.

Bachman Lake Visit the park around this northwest Dallas lake.

Hoblitzelle Park Find a pretty patch at this neighborhood park at Baxter and Mullins drives in Plano.

Inwood Road Brake for buds between Harry Hines Boulevard and Maple Avenue in Dallas.

Las Colinas Boulevard Peep a pop of color at La Villita Boulevard in Irving.

Mallard Park This spot near Lavon Lake is off State Highway 78 north of FM6.

Tandy Hills Natural Area Find many native plants on more than 200 acres of prairie about five minutes from downtown Fort Worth.

Zion Cemetery Find flowers outside this Frisco cemetery located northeast of the intersection of FM423 and Panther Creek Parkway.