The number of patients diagnosed with COVID-19 grows every day throughout the U.S. and across the world. Experts expect the number of U.S. cases to continue to rise in the coming weeks as more testing detects new infections. The numbers on this page are based on the latest statistics available, which is likely far lower than the actual number of cases due to limited testing across the U.S. Here's the situation as it stands:

The number of people diagnosed with COVID-19 each day has continued to increase as more tests have been administered across the country. Each state has declared the coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency, and many have implemented restrictions on travel, business and public gatherings.

Measures taken by states: 5 maps show how states differ on protecting Americans against coronavirus

New confirmed coronavirus patients reported in the US by day

As the number of sick patients has continued to grow, so has the number who are dying each day.

New coronavirus related deaths reported in the US by day

The spread of the disease in the U.S. has exhibited exponential growth, as the nation has become the epicenter of the global pandemic, and case totals have eclipsed those of other countries experiencing similar outbreaks.

How the US coronavirus case trajectory compares to other nations

The state of New York leads the nation in people who are confirmed to have COVID-19, but many other states are also showing signs of rapid spread of the virus. Some states like Washington have slowed the rate of growth, while others may be just days or weeks behind New York.

Growth in number of people confirmed to have novel coronavirus by state

You can search for the latest totals for your state below. Be sure to check back each day to see the latest news.

US coronavirus cases by state

Contributing: Janet Loehkre, Yoonserk Pyun, Matt Wynn, Coral Murphy-Marcos, Devon Link and Petruce Jean-Charles, USA TODAY

A note on data:

It's important to understand that the numbers reported by agencies and officials don't paint a complete picture of the pandemic. Many people who have COVID-19 — and no one knows how many — are not being counted by medical authorities. Because COVID-19 can have mild symptoms or even none at all, many people with the disease are unaware they have it. Others may have symptoms, but be unable to access testing near them. Finally, local governments and other organizations count and update case data differently, meaning different sources of information may show different numbers of cases.

More graphics about coronavirus

What to stock up on for coronavirus: Home quarantine shopping list

What to do to prevent coronavirus: 20 seconds of proper hand-washing

How coronavirus spreads: At dinner, at the market, during worship, at work

When will the vaccine be ready? At least 12-18 months

What to know about coronavirus: COVID-19, explained