Megyn Kelly is opening up about the loss of her 10-year-old son's music teacher to coronavirus and how she broke the terrible news to her child.

On April 8, Kelly shared on Twitter that Edward Yates' teacher, Don Sorel, lost his life to COVID-19.

"Our son Yates’s music teacher died yesterday of COVID-19. Don Sorel made Yates look forward to going to school, made him love music; all of the kids adored him. Telling Yates was awful," the former Fox News host wrote. "Pain for us is one thing; pain for one’s child is in a different league. RIP, Mr. Sorel."

In an interview with People published Saturday, Kelly described the moment she and her husband, Douglas Brunt, had to tell Yates his teacher died.

"I’m in the middle of this joyful moment with Yates and (Doug) shows me the (news) and it’s like, ‘Oh, my God, what am I going to do? Am I going to ruin this moment? But he’s got to know," Kelly said. "We have to tell them because all the boys are Zooming and they’re all on this group text where they text every 2 minutes. There’s no keeping it from him."

The former "Today" show anchor said it was "awful" having to sit her kid down and break the news to him.

"I couldn’t get it out without crying, and then he cried. We held each other,” she said.

Yates' school had told parents that Sorel was out of intensive care and doing better, Kelly said.

"I said, ‘I have something to tell you about Mr. Sorel.’ And I think maybe (Yates) was wondering if it was more good news because the last update had been good,” Kelly told People. “And then we said, ‘It’s bad news.’ And he just looked confused. And we were confused, too."

Coping amid COVID-19:In age of coronavirus, could social media be kids' saving grace?

Last month, Kelly shared that she was upset with how President Donald Trump's handling of the coronavirus pandemic is being portrayed in the media.

"I am so sick of seeking the news on Coronavirus and constantly getting bombarded w/how it’s all Trump’s fault or what Trump is calling the damn virus," Kelly tweeted. "Can we focus on what needs to be done right now and play the blame/political game later? Good Lord."

People took aim at Kelly's tweet, disagreeing with her take.

"He called it a hoax and delayed reporting of cases to make him look better. Stop enabling him," Josh Harwood wrote.

"As a fan, I’m disappointed in you about this. I haven’t heard anyone say it’s “his fault”. I can’t attest to what you are referring to. But calling it the “Chinese Virus” is absolutely irresponsible and unacceptable," tweeted Brian Sullivan.

In several tweets in March, Trump referred to COVID-19 as the "Chinese virus," which critics slammed as an anti-Asian sentiment.

More:Megyn Kelly is 'sick' of the coronavirus pandemic being blamed on Trump