We live in a world where smartphones are ubiquitous, tablets are commonplace, and even smartwatches are no longer novel. But throughout all of these advances, the humble laptop has persevered, and for good reason. When it comes time to actually get something done — whether that’s editing photos, writing a lot of emails, composing documents, or staying in touch with colleagues and family — the laptop is often the ideal device for the job.

What separates a good laptop from a great one is how it balances power, efficiency, portability, and comfort. It should have a fantastic keyboard and trackpad — after all, those are the two biggest reasons you’d choose a laptop over a smartphone or tablet. Its display should be easy on the eyes, bright, and sharp enough that you aren’t distracted by jagged edges and visible pixels. It should be powerful enough for almost anything short of intensive video editing and advanced gaming. It should be easy to carry around from place to place, and it should be able to last all day without needing to be plugged in. Increasingly, it should have a touchscreen to provide more flexibility with how you are able to interact with the laptop.

Naming “the best laptop” is a little different than naming the best phone or tablet. Needs for laptops can vary widely. Some people need to do intense video editing and should pony up for a pro machine. Others just need a reliable keyboard and a few windows, so something less powerful will do. Some might want a super light laptop that can sometimes double as a tablet. Some will want a portable gaming machine capable of running all of the latest titles. Here, we’re talking about the best all-around product: a traditional laptop that will work well doing most things for most people, and even stretch to handle more intensive tasks on occasion.

There are plenty of great options in the Windows PC world, complete with the latest processors and designs, but Apple’s MacBook lineup has been plagued with keyboard reliability issues, which makes them hard to enthusiastically recommend. Still, if you have your heart set on buying a macOS laptop for familiarity or compatibility reasons, we have a pick for you, too.

This guide does not include gaming laptops; if that’s something you’re looking for, we have a separate guide for that. This article will be continually updated as new laptops are released and reviewed, so be sure to check back if you’re not in the market right now.

The best laptop right now: HP Spectre x360 13

If you’re looking for a straightforward, compact, well-performing laptop with a good keyboard and trackpad, our recommendation is HP’s latest Spectre x360 13. The Spectre x360 is a premium-level 2-in-1 Windows laptop with the latest processor options from Intel, a vibrant touchscreen, and more port options than are found on other laptops in this segment.

The x360 weighs less than three pounds and is about two-thirds of an inch thick when closed, which makes it very easy to travel with. The latest model has a smaller footprint than before, thanks to shrunken bezels above and below the screen, but it still maintains a full-size keyboard and spacious trackpad. In addition, it provides both facial and fingerprint biometric authentication, so you can choose which way you prefer to log in.

Related The latest Spectre x360 13 shows that HP can actually make a good trackpad

Prior Spectre x360 models suffered from very poor trackpad performance, with sluggish scrolling and terrible palm rejection, but HP updated the drivers it uses in the latest model to Microsoft’s Precision set and the experience is improved to the point where it’s no longer an issue. The x360’s trackpad is now right up there with the best Windows trackpad options (which are still a tick behind what you get on a MacBook) in terms of scrolling, multifinger gestures, and palm rejection.

The Spectre x360 is available in 1080p and 4K OLED touchscreen options, but we recommend sticking with the 1080p display as it will have better battery life and costs less. The OLED panel is very vibrant, but at this size it’s hard to notice the difference in resolution.

Since it’s a 2-in-1, you can use the x360 in a variety of configurations: standard laptop, tablet, “tent”, and “media mode”. Of those, most people will end up using it as a laptop most of the time, with the tent and media modes coming in handy if you are just watching a movie on a plane. Like other 2-in-1 Windows laptops, the x360 is too big and heavy to really be practical in its tablet mode, but we don’t think that’s a knock against it since most people will just use it as a laptop anyway.

Compared to other laptops in this segment, such as Dell’s XPS 13 2-in-1 or Microsoft’s Surface Laptop 3, the x360 provides more port options, a keyboard that’s as good or better, and very similar performance and battery life for everyday productivity tasks and light creative work such as photo or video editing. It’s also a few hundred dollars less than other options when similarly configured.

The biggest argument against the x360 is that it has a 16:9 display, as opposed to the 16:10 or 3:2 screens you’ll find on Dell or Microsoft’s computers. Those taller aspect ratios are much better for productivity work, whether that’s working in two documents side by side or researching on the web without having to scroll as much. But unless you are very particular about your screen’s aspect ratio, most people won’t find this to be a deal breaker.

Overall, the Spectre x360 13 hits the right balance of features, performance, design, and cost better than any other laptop option right now, earning it our recommendation.

The Mac option: Apple MacBook Pro 13 (two USB-C ports)

If you are looking for a Mac laptop and are unable or unwilling to consider a Windows PC, then the best option available now is the latest version of the 13-inch MacBook Pro. This model has two Thunderbolt 3 USB-C ports (which distinguishes it from the more expensive models with four ports) and a quad-core Core i5 processor. Our recommended configuration has 8GB of RAM and 256GB of storage and is priced just under $1,500.

The MacBook Pro is more expensive than Apple’s entry-level laptop, the MacBook Air. But it justifies that cost with much better performance and quieter operation, without adding too much weight or bulk to its design. It is able to handle lots of browser tabs, virtual desktops, and frequent multitasking with ease, and it can hold its own with photo and light video editing, too. As with the XPS 13, it is not worth spending more to upgrade to the higher-end processor; as long as you’re getting a quad-core Core i5 chip, you’ll be fine.

The Pro also includes the Touch Bar, a touchscreen strip just above the keyboard that replaces the traditional row of function keys. Opinions on the Touch Bar are decidedly mixed, and many owners don’t find it to be any more useful than the old function keys for adjusting screen brightness and volume. There are some neat things you can do with it through third-party apps, and we don’t think its existence is enough to tank the MacBook Pro.

The Pro’s keyboard is a different story, however. The Pro still has the extremely low-profile butterfly switch keyboard found on the prior model and every other MacBook you can buy right now, but it has been revised with the “new materials” and dust shield that Apple introduced in later iterations. This has the effect of making the keyboard slightly quieter to type on, but these changes are primarily to improve the reliability of the keyboard, so it’s less likely to succumb to stuck or doubling keys because a tiny piece of dust got lodged in the switch.

In response to years of reported keyboard problems, Apple is now offering a four-year warranty and free repair service for any customer that experiences the following issues with their MacBook’s keyboard:

Letters or characters repeat unexpectedly

Letters or characters do not appear

Key(s) feel “sticky” or do not respond in a consistent manner

We applaud Apple for acknowledging the issue and providing support for customers affected by it. But without a clear answer on whether it has addressed the fundamental design that causes these issues, it’s quite possible that the problems will come back over time. That means that you’ll likely have to go through the process of getting your laptop fixed when the keyboard fails at some point, which is a hassle, even if it’s free.

Other options

There are many other laptop options on the market, even within the premium priced, over $1,000 tier. Some provide more horsepower and larger screens than our picks, so if your focus is on photo editing, video editing, or coding, they might be a better option for you.

Others have a taller aspect ratio screen, which is much more comfortable to use if you primarily do your work in Office documents or a web browser. Once you try a 3:2 or even 16:10 display, it can be hard to go back to the cramped, tunnel-like view that a 13.3-inch 16:9 screen provides.

Our review of Microsoft Surface Laptop 3 15" Verge Score 7 out of 10 Good Stuff Excellent keyboard and trackpad

Sturdy build quality

Good performance for everyday productivity tasks

3:2 aspect ratio screen is great for productivity

Relatively little bloatware out of the box

Windows Hello facial login works great Bad Stuff Only two USB ports

No Thunderbolt 3 ports

Below average battery life

No SD card slot

Matte black model gets full of fingerprints almost immediately

Struggles editing and even playing back 4K video Buy for $1,199.00 from Microsoft Buy for $1,199.00 from Best Buy

Our review of Apple MacBook Air (2019) Verge Score 7 out of 10 Good Stuff Touch ID for login

True Tone display looks great

Thin, classic design Bad Stuff Processor can sometimes struggle

USB-C ecosystem still a hassle

Can you really trust this keyboard? Buy for $1,099.00 from Apple Buy for $1,076.99 from Walmart

Our review of Dell XPS 13 2-in-1 (2019) Verge Score 8 out of 10 Good Stuff Spacious keyboard and trackpad

Fast performance from 10th-gen Ice Lake processor

16:10 screen is much better for productivity Bad Stuff Still not a very practical tablet

Touchscreen doesn’t always register taps

Low-profile keyboard can be divisive Buy for $999.99 from Dell

Our review of Dell XPS 15 7590 Verge Score 7.5 out of 10 Good Stuff Still an elegant workhorse

OLED is awesome

The webcam is back where it belongs Bad Stuff Powerful components get hot and can throttle

OLED screen is a battery hog

Quality control issues may still be a problem Buy for $1,049.99 from Dell Buy for $1,399.99 from Amazon

Our review of HP Elite Dragonfly Verge Score 8 out of 10 Good Stuff Light, durable chassis

Lovely matte blue color that doesn’t collect fingerprints

Quiet keyboard that’s very nice to type on

Strong performance for productivity work

Lots of configuration options Bad Stuff It really should have a 3:2 display

Power button is in an awkward spot

Sticker shock

Some annoying system bugs

Not available in all of the typical places you buy a laptop Buy for $1,629.00 from HP Buy for $1,578.00 from Amazon

Our review of HP Spectre X360 15 OLED Verge Score 6 out of 10 Good Stuff OLED screen is beautiful

Snappy performance for productivity work

Physical camera switch provides nice privacy option Bad Stuff The trackpad is the absolute worst

Only average battery life

Can’t get the best screen with the best processor option Buy for $1,999.99 from Best Buy

Our review of HP Spectre Folio 13 Verge Score 7 out of 10 Good Stuff Unique design and leather finish

Flexible hinge

Great battery life and solid performance Bad Stuff 16:9 screen is dated and cramped for productivity work

Speakers are tinny

Trackpad is horrible Buy for $1,299.99 from HP Buy for $1,399.99 from Best Buy

Our review of LG Gram 17 Verge Score 8 out of 10 Good Stuff Beautiful 17-inch screen in a laptop so light it feels fake

Excellent performance for everyday PC usage

Nice selection of ports, including Thunderbolt 3 Bad Stuff There’s a lot of flex

No dedicated GPU, despite high price

Display isn’t a touchscreen

Truly horrendous speakers Buy for $1,549.99 from Best Buy Buy for $1,549.99 from LG

Our review of Samsung Notebook 9 Pro Verge Score 7 out of 10 Good Stuff Solid build quality

Fast, quiet performance

Sharp, bright display Bad Stuff Shallow keyboard

Frustrating function row layout

Inconsistent fingerprint scanner Buy for $1,049.99 from Best Buy

Our review of Vaio SX14 Verge Score 7 out of 10 Good Stuff Has almost every port you could need

Lightweight but sturdy

Tilted keyboard is comfortable to type on Bad Stuff Insufficient battery life

Too-small touchpad

No touchscreen or LTE options Buy for $1,299.00 from Vaio

Our review of Lenovo Ideapad S940 Verge Score 6.5 out of 10 Good Stuff Gorgeous, bright screen

Comfortable keyboard

Excellent build quality Bad Stuff Poor battery life

No touchscreen option

Loaded with bloatware Buy for $1,799.99 from Lenovo

Our review of Asus Zenbook S13 Verge Score 7 out of 10 Good Stuff Comfortable keyboard

Smooth trackpad

Solid build quality

Snappy performance Bad Stuff No touchscreen

Asus bloatware Buy for $1,283.49 from Amazon

Our review of Acer Swift 7 Verge Score 5 out of 10 Good Stuff Incredibly thin and light

Large display for its size

Fanless design keeps things quiet Bad Stuff Awkward keyboard layout

Poor palm rejection on the trackpad

Thin, wimpy speakers

Doesn’t like to charge with standard USB-C adapters

Webcam is virtually useless

Display has a slow touch response

Doesn’t take much to overwhelm the processor Buy for $1,449.00 from Microsoft Buy for $1,938.99 from Newegg