Many major networks appeared to ignore the news that an Islamic cleric who spoke at Independent Sen. Bernie Sanders’s rally March 7 claimed the terrorist group ISIS is “somehow connected to Israel.”

Michigan-based Imam Sayed Hassan Qazwini spoke at Sanders’s rally and announced that America needs someone who won’t “promote” anti-Semitism, Islamophobia or white supremacy. He added that the country needs “someone like Bernie Sanders, who loves all and supports all.”

Despite his comments Saturday, Qazwini has previously claimed that ISIS works with Israel to harm how the Imam is viewed. He also referred to Sanders as an “honorable man, even though he is a Jew” and called homosexuality “a form of disorder.”

Outlets such as CNN, ABC News and NBC News and the Associated Press appeared to ignore this news. The publications also appeared to ignore the follow-up where the Sanders campaign denounced Qazwini.

None of the publications responded to a request for comment from the Daily Caller.

Many of these outlets have previously failed to cover breaking news regarding politicians. Some of these publications also ignored the August 2019 news surrounding Democratic Rep. Ilhan Omar’s alleged use of campaign funds to pursue an affair with a married man.

Fox News, the Washington Examiner, Mediaite and some other publications did cover the controversial Imam. (RELATED: Outlets That Ripped Apart Bristol Palin’s 2008 Teen Pregnancy Gloss Over Hunter Biden’s Alleged New Kid)

WATCH:

Detroit-Based Shiite Imam Hassan Qazwini: ISIS Run by Israel, Zionists In Order to Kill Muslims, Defame Islam; Israel Benefits from ISIS More than Anyone (Archival) pic.twitter.com/3Y2d0sIJk4 — MEMRI (@MEMRIReports) May 2, 2019

“The campaign has been made aware of offensive and toxic past statements by Imam Qazwini,” Sanders campaign manager Faiz Shakir said according to Washington Post columnist Josh Rogin. “These statements are dangerous, hateful, and violate the principles of our movement, which is based on values of equality and dignity for all people.”