Who will get what and when from the $2 trillion relief package The plan provides direct payments to taxpayers, jobless benefits.

President Donald Trump on Friday signed the massive $2 trillion stimulus package into law during a signing ceremony in the Oval Office.

"I want to thank Democrats and Republicans for coming together and putting America first," Trump said.

The House passed the bill, the largest aid measure in American history, earlier Friday in a voice vote after lawmakers were called back to the nation's capital to push the bill through.

The stimulus package will provide essential relief to American workers and an economy reeling from the coronavirus crisis

The White House and Senate negotiators struck a deal early Wednesday morning after days of late-night talks and the Senate unanimously approved the measure 96-0 on Wednesday.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell smiles as he leaves the Senate floor at the U.S. Capitol, March 25, 2020, in Washington. Alex Edelman/AFP via Getty Images

Tune into ABC at 1 p.m. ET and ABC News Live at 4 p.m. ET every weekday for special coverage of the novel coronavirus with the full ABC News team, including the latest news, context and analysis.

A view of the Capitol's Rotunda is seen reflected in an ambulance as negotiations on a COVID-19 economic bailout continue on Capitol Hill, March 24, 2020, in Washington. Brendan Smialowski/AFP via Getty Images

Here are the key takeaways on who will get what and when:

Direct payments for most Americans taxpayers

Under the plan, individuals who earn $75,000 or less in adjusted gross income would get direct payments of $1,200 each, with married couples earning up to $150,000 receiving $2,400.

An additional $500 per child will be tacked on to that.

The payment would scale down as income rises, phasing out entirely at $99,000 for singles and $198,000 for couples without children.

Ninety percent of Americans would be eligible to receive full or partial payments, according to estimates by the Tax Policy Center.

It’s unclear how long it will take the Internal Revenue Service to process and calculate each and every payment. The White House has indicated that Americans could be seeing direct payments as soon as April 6.

Expanded unemployment insurance

Lawmakers agreed to a significant expansion of unemployment benefits that would expand unemployment insurance by 13 weeks and include a four-month enhancement of benefits -- an additional $600 per week - on top of what state unemployment programs pay.

In total, unemployed workers are eligible to receive up to 39 weeks of unemployment benefits.

The program was expanded to include freelancers, furloughed employees and gig workers, such as Uber drivers.

The massive boost in unemployment insurance is expected to cost $250 billion.

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer speaks to the media before a meeting with Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin to wrap up work on coronavirus economic aid legislation to prevent the spread of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in Washington, March 20, 2020. Mary F. Calvert/Reuters

Small business to receive emergency loans

The legislation creates a $367 billion federally-guaranteed loan program for small businesses who must pledge not to lay off their workers.

The loans would be available during an emergency period ending at the of June, and would be forgiven if the employer pays its workers for the duration of the crisis.

According to Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer's office, the deal also includes $10 billion in Small Business Administration emergency grants and up to $10 million of emergency relief per business. It allocates $17 billion for the SBA to cover six months of payment for small businesses with existing SBA loans.

It will offer $30 billion in emergency education funding and $25 billion in emergency transit funding.

A plane from Delta airline is seen above the skyline of Manhattan before it lands at JFK airport in New York, March 15, 2020. AFP via Getty Images, FILE

Big companies get cash

The plan includes loans for distressed companies from a $425 billion fund controlled by the Federal Reserve. An additional $75 billion would be available for industry-specific loans, including to airlines and hotels.

This was a major sticking point for Democrats: they successfully pushed for oversight, including the installment of an inspector general and a congressionally appointed board to monitor the fund.

The plan also calls for an immediate disclosure of the fund recipients.

The stimulus bill also includes a provision that forbids President Trump and his family, as well as other top government officials and members of Congress from getting loans or investments from Treasury programs in the stimulus, according to Schumer's office.

As part of the deal, airlines will be prohibited from stock buybacks and CEO bonuses, Schumer wrote in a letter Wednesday to Democratic senators.

Hospitals drowning under crisis to receive aid

The massive package also includes $100 billion in assistance for hospitals and health systems across the nation.

Schumer said the plan offers “billions more” for critical investments into personal and protective equipment for health care workers, testing supplies, increased workforce and training, among other things.

Lawmakers also agreed to increase Medicare payment increases to all hospitals and providers, Schumer said.

What to know about coronavirus:

How it started and how to protect yourself: coronavirus explained

What to do if you have symptoms: coronavirus symptoms

Tracking the spread in the US and Worldwide: coronavirus map

This report was featured in the Thursday, March 26, 2020, episode of “Start Here,” ABC News’ daily news podcast.

"Start Here" offers a straightforward look at the day's top stories in 20 minutes. Listen for free every weekday on Apple Podcasts, Google Podcasts, Spotify, the ABC News app or wherever you get your podcasts.