The uneasy rift between White House adviser Kellyanne Conway and her husband, the indefatigable Trump critic George Conway, appeared to widen this weekend, when Kellyanne was forced to address their difference of opinion on the record. “No, I don’t share those concerns,” she told reporters Monday morning, referring to a series of tweets in which her husband suggested that her boss has a diagnosable mental disorder and that his “condition is getting worse.” She added, of the tweets, “I have four kids and I was getting them out of the house this morning before I got here so I can talk to the president about substance, so I may not be up to speed on all of them.”

For close observers, the Conways’ divided household is a source of endless fascination—and a microcosm of America’s partisan split. Kellyanne, who steered Trump’s campaign, became infamous early on for her ardent and recursive defenses, characterized by reality-bending personal attacks on those who dared question the president. Meanwhile George, a lawyer, has become a full-time Trump critic. Over the weekend, while Trump rage-tweeted about Saturday Night Live, George launched a heretofore unprecedented offensive, tweeting pages from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, including an entry for “Narcissistic Personality Disorder: a pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behavior), need for admiration, and lack of empathy.”

George Conway also re-tweeted media and political figures skeptical of the president’s fitness for office, at times appending his agreement. “Don’t assume that the things he says and does are part of a rational plan or strategy, because they seldom are,” he wrote at one point, quote-tweeting Never Trumper Bill Kristol. “Consider them as a product of his pathologies, and they make perfect sense.”

This weekend’s split-screen extended to other topics. Around the time George was re-tweeting criticism of Trump for failing to sufficiently address the mosque shooting in Christchurch, New Zealand, Kellyanne popped up on Fox & Friends to take the opposite stance. “I guess everybody scoured it and searched for Donald Trump’s name,” she said of the shooter’s manifesto, which mentioned the president as a source of inspiration. She went on to argue that the gunman was more of an “eco-naturalist or an eco-fascist” than a white nationalist, and that “people should read the [manifesto] in its entirety” for proof that Trump is blameless.

The definitive piece on the Conway marriage, published in The Washington Post in August 2018, depicted their divided household as one in which they frequently butt heads over Kellyanne’s position as Trump’s chief defender. Their marriage survives, the article posits, by the grace of a 15,000-square-foot house, where each can get some distance from the other. One of the most-cited exchanges came when writer Ben Terris pressed Kellyanne on whether she found George’s tweets “disrespectful” and she tried (and failed) to play the “off the record” card:

Kellyanne: It is disrespectful, it’s a violation of basic decency, certainly, if not marital vows . . . as “a person familiar with their relationship.” Me: No, we’re on the record here. You can’t say after the fact “as someone familiar.” Kellyanne: Fine. I’ve never actually said what I think about it and I won’t say what I think about it, which tells you what I think about it.

Since then, in the words of George himself, things have only gotten worse.

More Great Stories from Vanity Fair

— What does “elite university” even mean? Why we should rethink the whole gambit.

— Why Democratic 2020 hopefuls should think about getting off Twitter

— Mike Pompeo is sure acting like a guy running for president

— Nick Bilton on Mark Zuckerberg’s false promise

Looking for more? Sign up for our daily Hive newsletter and never miss a story.