In its first virtual meeting, the California Fish and Game Commission voted 5-0 Wednesday to authorize emergency fishing closures to help prevent the spread of the coronavirus to the rural eastern Sierra and other regions.

The action is the first step to delaying the opening of trout season, set for April 25, in Inyo, Mono and Alpine counties, and would keep much of the high Sierra off limits to anglers from urban areas.

“This is not about closing fishing seasons,” said commission President Eric Sklar. “It’s a surgical approach, narrow and targeted.” The order will end May 31, he said.

Sklar will work with California Department of Fish and Wildlife Director Chuck Bonham to address specific proposals from counties. The trout opener likely will be postponed for the eastern Sierra. In past trout openers, more than 1 million anglers, most from Southern California, have traveled to the eastern Sierra. In some years, so many people arrived at Crowley Lake in Mono County that a flare was shot into the sky to signal the exact moment when the season officially started and the first casts could be made.

“This situation raises a legitimate concern of the transmission of COVID-19 from outside areas,” Bonham said. “My focus is on these three counties. Given what’s going on across the planet, across the country, it would be irresponsible to not be responsive to the needs of local counties to make it through this emergency.”

Calling into the meeting was a succession of speakers from areas with low populations, few cases of COVID-19 and closed hotels, campgrounds and restaurants, who urged the commission to postpone the April 25 opener and keep visitors away.

“We’re very concerned about people from urban areas bringing COVID-19 to Alpine County,” said Nichole Williamson, the county’s health and human services director. “We’ve had one case, and it was brought in. We’ve requested people stay away right now.”

The core of the issue is travel, said Ed Valenzuela, a Siskiyou County supervisor. He warned the commission that closing the trout opener in the eastern Sierra, while necessary, could move the problem to other areas. Trinity, Modoc, Lassen, Sierra and Mariposa counties had no cases of coronavirus as of Friday afternoon.

Many who opposed the proposal were from San Diego and the Los Angeles area and feared it could lead to sweeping closures.

“In the draft proposed, it gives carte blanche for the entire state, not just three communities,” said Steven Sampson of Marina Del Rey Anglers. “If you would clarify that, you would get less push back.”

Sklar responded that a statewide closure was never considered.

“That (rumor) created a lot of havoc that was unnecessary,” he said, referring to talk circulating after local officials ordered blanket fishing closures in San Diego County and Washington closed fishing across the state.

Last week, the commission’s first attempt to hold a virtual meeting crashed due to a deluge of more than 500 online participants.

Tom Stienstra is The San Francisco Chronicle’s outdoors writer. Email: tstienstra@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @StienstraTom