A group of Senate Democrats is urging Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin Steven Terner MnuchinMcCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package 13 things to know for today on coronavirus On The Money: Millions wait for virus relief checks in major test for IRS | Senate misses deadline to replenish small-business loan program | Fresh produce goes to waste as coronavirus snarls supply chains MORE to exempt checks being issued as part of last month's $2.2 trillion coronavirus relief bill from being subjected to garnishment by debt collectors.

Fourteen senators on Friday sent a letter, spearheaded by Sen. Kamala Harris Kamala Devi Harris13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Biden told to think economy with VP pick Democratic senators: Airlines sitting on billion in 'customer cash' MORE (D-Calif.), to Mnuchin urging him to issue regulatory rules that would exempt the stimulus checks from private debt collection.

"There are concerns that the direct assistance checks that Americans are receiving may be subject to private debt collection, which could potentially deprive Americans of essential assistance that they need in order to pay bills and keep food on the table," the senators wrote to Mnuchin in the letter, a copy of which was obtained by The Hill ahead of its release.

ADVERTISEMENT

"We ask you to act right away to use Treasury’s rulemaking authority to exempt Americans’ direct assistance payments from private debt collection so that American families can receive critical assistance to help them get through this unprecedented crisis," they added.

In addition to Harris, Sens. Dick Durbin Richard (Dick) Joseph DurbinKey senators negotiating potential deal to allow remote Senate hearings 13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening MORE (D-Ill.), Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move The Hill's Campaign Report: Trump inflames red state-blue state coronavirus divide Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (I-Vt.), Chris Murphy Christopher (Chris) Scott Murphy13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Overnight Health Care: Trump to release guidelines on easing social distancing on Thursday | Trump WHO cuts meet blowback | Officials warn of lack of testing supplies | Global cases surpass 2 million Trump WHO cuts meet with furious blowback MORE (D-Conn.), Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.), Chris Van Hollen Christopher (Chris) Van Hollen13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Peace Corps faces uncertain future with no volunteers in field The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Georges Benjamin says cutting WHO funds could be crime against humanity; COVID-19 cases surpass 2 million MORE (D-Md.), Jeff Merkley Jeffrey (Jeff) Alan Merkley13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Trump WHO cuts meet with furious blowback Trump administration to rent 23M barrels of storage space to oil companies amid falling prices MORE (D-Ore.), Patty Murray Patricia (Patty) Lynn Murray13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Senate Democrats unveil plan to ramp up coronavirus testing that includes billion in emergency funding Warren wants paid sick leave, 'premium pay' for essential workers in next coronavirus bill MORE (D-Wash.), Doug Jones (D-Ala.), Sheldon Whitehouse Sheldon Whitehouse13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection The Hill's Morning Report - Presented by Facebook - Will Trump's plan to reopen the economy work? Business tax provisions in coronavirus relief law spark controversy MORE (D-R.I.), Tammy Baldwin Tammy Suzanne Baldwin13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Michigan, Wisconsin Democratic senators endorse Biden Biden's pick for vice president doesn't matter much MORE (D-Wis.), Amy Klobuchar Amy KlobucharBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Key senators negotiating potential deal to allow remote Senate hearings Democrats press USDA to create rural coronavirus task force MORE (D-Minn.) and Tina Smith Tina Flint SmithDemocrats press USDA to create rural coronavirus task force 13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Warren, Smith call for B to rescue child care centers amid drop in attendance MORE (D-Minn.) signed the letter.

The coronavirus legislation passed last month provides $1,200 in direct assistance to individuals who make up to $75,000, with the amount scaled down for higher incomes until reaching an annual gross adjusted income of $99,000, where it phases out altogether. An additional $500 per child is also included.

The letter comes after The American Prospect published audio this week of Treasury official Ronda Kent discussing with banks how they should handle the coronavirus checks if the account holder had outstanding loans or debt. According to the audio, Kent told banks there is "nothing in the law that precludes" the funds from being garnished and it is up to banks.

Top banking associations also sent a letter to Sens. Sherrod Brown Sherrod Campbell Brown13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection Hillicon Valley: Pentagon IG could not determine if White House interfered in cloud contract | Amazon firings fuel controversy over virus response | States begin shifting to mail-in voting | Agencies warn of North Korean cyber threats Amazon firings fuel controversy over its virus response MORE (D-Ohio) and Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth WarrenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move McConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (D-Mass.) noting that under the coronavirus bill, "Congress failed to define these payments as benefits subject to preemption from garnishment."

ADVERTISEMENT

"As a result, with regard to any legal garnishment, depository institutions have no discretion and are obligated to comply with applicable state laws and court-ordered garnishments," the groups said, adding that Congress should pass language clarifying future COVID-19 payments.

The senators noted in their letter to Mnuchin that the coronavirus legislation did not directly exempt the direct cash payments from private debt collection, but that it "belies the intent behind the law."

"Treasury has the rulemaking authority specifically to ensure that as part of its process of implementing the direct payment program, it could ensure that the checks Americans were receiving were exempt from private debt collection," they wrote.

"We ask you to ensure that direct assistance checks cannot be garnished for private debt collection purposes," they added.

Harris's letter comes as the first round of stimulus checks went out this week for individuals who have authorized the IRS to make a direct deposit into their bank accounts. Senate Democrats, noting that money is already being sent out, asked Treasury to complete any rulemaking to protect the checks from private debt collection by April 24.

Brown and Sen. Josh Hawley Joshua (Josh) David Hawley13 senators join Harris letter urging Mnuchin to exempt coronavirus checks from private debt collection The Hill's 12:30 Report: Trump turns to lawmakers to advise on reopening Trump taps members of Congress to advise on reopening MORE (R-Mo.) sent their own letter last week to the Treasury Department, urging Mnuchin to use his rulemaking authority to protect the recovery checks from private debt collectors. A group of state attorneys general sent Mnuchin a similar request on Monday.