A Connecticut judge has thrown out a closely watched lawsuit against Remington Outdoor over the 2012 Sandy Hook massacre, saying the plaintiffs failed to maneuver around a federal law prohibiting lawsuits against gun manufacturers over crimes committed with their products.

In a 54-page ruling, Superior Court Judge Barbara Bellis ticked through the various ways plaintiff lawyers tried to make a case against Remington, which made the Bushmaster rifle Adam Lanza used to kill 26 children and teachers on Dec. 14, 2012. All failed to fit the exceptions Congress wrote into the law, including one for "negligent entrustment," or knowingly transferring a weapon to someone who will use it to commit a crime.

Plaintiff lawyers representing the families of Sandy Hook victims argued this was a “top-down” case where the “entrustment” was to the public at large, and the public was incapable of handling the military-style weapon Adam Lanza used. They also sued the distributor that bought the gun at wholesale from Remington and the retailer who sold the gun to Lanza's mother Nancy, a licensed gun owner whom Lanza killed before moving on to a nearby elementary school.

“To extend the theory of negligent entrustment to the class of nonmilitary, nonpolice citizens – the general public – would imply that the general public lacks the ordinary prudence necessary to handle an object that Congress regards as appropriate for sale to the general public,” Bellis wrote. “This the court is unwilling to do.”

Attorney Joshua Koskoff of Koskoff & Bieder vowed to appeal the dismissal.

"While the families are obviously disappointed with the judge’s decision, this is not the end of the fight," he said in a prepared statement. "We will appeal this decision immediately and continue our work to help prevent the next Sandy Hook from happening.”

The judge did agree with the plaintiffs, over Remington’s objections, that the manufacturer qualified as a “seller” under the PLCAA subject to the negligent entrustment exception. But the judge rejected the plaintiffs' argument that Remington could be said to have entrusted the weapon to someone who used it in a criminal manner.

Examining legislative history, the judge found that dissenting members of Congress tried to broaden the definition of negligent entrustment to include a series of transactions that place a gun in a criminal's hands, but failed. Cognizant of massacres like Columbine, she wrote, Congress limited negligent entrustment to the direct transfer of a weapon to a shooter.

“Based on the clear intent of Congress to narrowly define the `negligent entrustment’ exception, Adam Lanza’s use of the firearm is the only actionable use,” she wrote. Therefore none of the people the defendants actually entrusted the gun to “used” it to commit a crime.

The judge also rejected the plaintiffs’ attempt to slip their claims in under Connecticut’s consumer protection law, saying that law is limited to lawsuits where the plaintiff had some business relationship with the defendant.

And she rejected their product-liability claims, because the gun most definitely worked as intended.

The dismissal puts an end to an innovative attempt to get around the PLCAA, which Congress passed to thwart lawsuits against gun manufacturers over the crimes committed with their products. Judge Bellis allowed the case to proceed longer than might have been expected, given the clear conflict with the PLCAA, and even mused that there might be a comparison to cigarette litigation at a June hearing on Remington's motion to dismiss.

Remington is owned by Freedom Group, a unit of Cerberus Capital.