Some idled 3-D printers in the campus crafts studio — along with a box of rubber bands and the plastic covers used on term papers — are helping UCSF crank out hundreds of face shields for hospital workers.

The ingenious creations meet federal specifications and, along with face masks, provide protection for doctors and nurses against coronavirus infection.

The shield making starts in the UCSF Makers Lab, a room tucked away in the campus library and often used by students and campus workers in their spare time to create craft projects. The lab had been shut down, along with much of the rest of the campus.

Now the printers have been programmed to turn out thin, curved plastic bands with three small posts across the brow.

Now Playing:

The masks are assembled using an ordinary three-hole office punch. The punch makes holes in the plastic term paper covers that are fastened to the posts. The whole thing is secured around the wearer’s head with three knotted-together rubber bands.

“This protects a worker’s face from splashes and droplets,” said Ramana Sastry, campus director of clinical engineering at UCSF Health. “This design is inexpensive and quick.”

Each shield takes about an hour to make and costs $1 in materials, a fraction of the price of scarce commercially available shields. Elsewhere on campus, orthopedic surgeons have repurposed their own 3-D printers, usually used for fabricating bone models, into the shield-making effort.

Small partitions have been built around the library 3-D printers, to allow operators to maintain social distance. The printers are humming around the clock.

Musical reminder: The latest person to urge the world to wash its hands is the great songwriter Randy Newman.

“Stay away from me, baby,” Newman sings in a tune he composed for a Los Angeles public radio station and posted online on Wednesday. “Keep your distance, please. Stay away from me, baby. Words of love in times like these.”

The seven-time Grammy-winning Newman, sheltering in place with his dog whining in the background, sat down at his piano and casually plinked out an offering as comfortable as macaroni and cheese. You can listen to it here: https://bit.ly/2JXuHmM.

“I’m gonna be with you 24 hours a day,” the tune continues. “A lot of people couldn’t stand that, but you can. You’ll be with me 24 hours a day. What a lucky man I am. ... Wash your hands, don’t touch your face.”

At the end, Newman turned to the camera and spoke with passion about the cause of handwashing.

“It’s hard for Americans, that don’t like being told what to do,” he said. “But in this case, let’s do it.”

Surgical precision: The bobblehead king of America was about to start cranking out 20,000 bobblehead dolls with the likeness of coronavirus guru Dr. Anthony Fauci when he slammed on the brakes.

Something wasn’t right with the prototype. There was too much space between the “r” and the period in “Dr.” The doc’s nose needed tweaking. And the polka dots on the doc’s tie were too big.

“With a national icon like Dr. Fauci, you want to get everything exactly right,” said Phil Sklar, president of the National Bobblehead Hall of Fame and Museum. “You have an obligation. People have a genuine affection for Dr. Fauci. His bobblehead has to be perfect.”

Not once, not twice, but three times did Sklar order his sculptors to go back to work. There was something wrong with the doc’s cheeks, something wrong with the doc’s chin, something wrong with the doc’s wrinkles.

“Now,” Sklar said, “I think we have it.”

The timing couldn’t be better, because the bobblehead factory in China that handles Sklar’s orders is back in business after being shut down for the same virus that Fauci and his misplaced period are battling. There is irony in bobbleheads, Sklar said, along with joy.

“Bobbleheads are just fun,” he said. “They’re quirky. They bobble. Some bobble better that others. But all of them make you smile.”

The Fauci bobblehead is breaking sales records, although Sklar said he routinely provides bobbleheads in greater numbers for stadium giveaways. But most of those bobbleheads are not wearing polka dot ties.

Now Playing:

The Fauci doll has been Sklar’s main focus ever since he was forced last month to shut down his Milwaukee museum full of 10,000 bobbleheads. He waited until the nearby Milwaukee art museum closed its own doors, because even though the head on its sculpture by Auguste Rodin doesn’t move, Sklar figured the two museums were in the same line of work.

Share with us the ‘good news’ The news these days can be sobering, even grim. There’s a lot of uncertainty and discomfort most everywhere you look. But amid the darkness, there are rays of light: young people helping older neighbors, musicians and fitness coaches offering their talents online, neighbors having outdoor dance parties (using proper social distancing). We’d like to know about examples of good news you have witnessed during this time. You can tell us your thoughts online at SFChronicle.com by using our Assignment Editor tool, or send an email (which can include a photo) with the subject line “Good News” to metro@sfchronicle.com.

Read More

For every $25 Fauci bobblehead sale, Sklar is donating $5 to the American Hospital Association for its drive to produce 100 million hospital masks. Sklar turned over $100,000 this week. Usually donations like that get made with a giant check and a public celebration, but Dr. Fauci and his bobblehead are operating in unusual times. Sklar put the check in the mail.

Steve Rubenstein is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. E-mail: srubenstein@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @SteveRubeSF