Healthy pantry snack idea: Make Geoffrey Zakarian's spiced bean dip recipe Need ideas to use the beans in your pantry?

Home cooking tips for meals with ingredients you may already have

Home cooking tips for meals with ingredients you may already have

Need ideas to use the beans in your pantry? Try chef Geoffrey Zakarian's spiced bean dip recipe. Paired great with veggies and chips, this healthy dip uses common pantry items and won't disappoint.

Zakarian shared the full recipe with "Good Morning America" below.

Recipe for Spiced Bean Dip

Make Geoffrey Zakarian's spiced bean dip recipe Courtesy Geoffrey Zakarian

Ingredients:



½ cup extra-virgin olive oil

6 garlic cloves, crushed

½ teaspoon ground cumin

½ teaspoon smoked paprika

¼ teaspoon ground cinnamon

¼ teaspoon ground fennel seed

¼ teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes

1/8 teaspoon ground cardamom

3 cups cooked and drained cannellini beans

Juice of 2 lemons (about 6 tablespoons)

Kosher salt

2 tablespoons pine nuts, toasted

Pita chips, crackers, or crudité, for dipping



Directions:

In a small saucepan, heat the oil and garlic over low heat. Let the garlic gently bubble in the oil until it has softened but hasn't taken on any color, about 5 minutes.

Stir in the cumin, paprika, cinnamon, fennel, pepper flakes and cardamom and let toast until fragrant, about 1 minute.

Remove from heat and let cool for 10 minutes.

Add the beans and lemon juice to a food processor. Add the cooked garlic cloves and all but one tablespoon of spiced oil.

Puree to make a smooth dip, season with salt, and puree again.

Spoon the dip into a wide bowl and sprinkle with the pine nuts.

Drizzle the remaining 1 tablespoon of spiced oil over the dip and serve.

Tips:



1. Drain the beans well in a colander until the running water is clear.

2. Use whole spices when you can; simply grind for this recipe then toast as per recipe.

3. If your lemons are too firm, microwave for 15 second intervals unit they soften, no longer than 45 seconds.

