The pro-Trump "America First Action" Super PAC is out with a new series of ads titled "#Beijing Biden" accusing former Vice President Joe Biden of having a too-cozy relationship with China. The group will be spending $10 million to run this ad campaign in the key swing states of Wisconsin, Michigan, and Pennslyvania for the rest of this month.



The first intersperses a clip of Biden saying China "are not bad folks, folks," and accuses the Chinese government of "killing our jobs, stealing technology, and putting America’s health in danger."





NARRATOR: After 47 years in Washington, Joe Biden on China:



BIDEN: They’re not bad folks, folks. But guess what…they’re not competition for us.



NARRATOR: China is killing our jobs, stealing technology, putting America’s health in danger. And Biden?



BIDEN: They’re not bad folks, folks.



NARRATOR: After 47 years in Washington, Joe Biden, just doesn’t make sense.

#BeijingBiden, a swamp dinosaur for nearly a half century. He’s been an enabler and appeaser of the Chinese Communist Party for years, the regime that’s now infected the world and crashed the global economy.



Please see the new @AmericaFirstPAC message:pic.twitter.com/aw5AI37UtP — Steve Cortes (@CortesSteve) April 17, 2020

NARRATOR: For 47 years the DC elite has made one country great, Joe Biden has led the charge.



BIDEN: I believed in 1979 and said so and believe now a rising China is a positive development.



NARRATOR: China stole American manufacturing and horded our emergency stockpile.



BIDEN: We’re not trying to slow down Chinese growth.



NARRATOR: Now more than ever America must stop China and to stop China you have to stop Joe Biden.

NARRATOR: A global crisis, President Trump took action, but Joe Biden attacked Trump after the China travel ban.



BIDEN: Xenophobia and fear-mongering.



NARRATOR: For 40 years Joe Biden has been wrong about China.



BIDEN: I believed in 1979…and I believe now that a rising China is a positive development.



NARRATOR: A deadly epidemic. But after 40 years Joe Biden failed the test.

The PAC's spokesman Steve Cortes tweeted:A second ad in the " #Beijing Biden " series is titled "Stop China, Stop Joe Biden," and says Joe Biden has "led the charge" for 47 years to make China "great."The third, titled "Joe Biden Has Been Wrong For Years," highlights Biden calling President Trump's early shutdown of travel from China during the coronavirus pandemic as "xenophobia and fear-mongering."