Those that stayed debated whether they should use their time now, or bank their sick days in case things become even worse. Mr. Jackson reasoned that since he is 34, healthy and lives alone, he could afford the risk. “We haven’t hit the peak yet so let’s work through this right now,” he said, reflecting the view of some of his colleagues.

But he said he felt like the nonessential parts of his job should be jettisoned to focus on delivering important goods and products. “We’re still sending brochures for cruise trips, thousands of them,” he said. “This doesn’t need to happen.”

In a message to postal employees last week, Megan J. Brennan, the postmaster general, said that “there is no evidence the virus can spread through the mail.” A recent study in The New England Journal of Medicine suggests that the virus disintegrates over the course of a day on cardboard.

But direct handling of the mail is only one aspect of the job inside postal facilities. Hundreds of people rotate through most warehouses, handling equipment, loading trucks, preparing the mail to be delivered door-to-door by letter carriers who in turn fan out to homes across their area. That leaves plenty of opportunities to spread the disease, Mr. Jackson said, and there has not been enough planning or support.

“A lot of people asked, would they shut down the building for cleaning? Not an option,” he said.

As for letter carriers who go door to door, new rules are quickly taking hold. Letter carriers walking up to people’s doorsteps are instructed to “politely ask the customer to step back a safe distance,” and to ask for their name instead of requesting their signature.

Mr. Hogrogian, the union president, said he had been in direct conversation with senior postal officials about how to protect his people. The most glaring gap, he said, was that sometimes it took several days for officials to identify the people who had been in close contact with those who have tested positive.

“If they can’t determine who’s been in close contact for three or four days,” he said, “that’s three or four more days that employees are allowed to work.”