Since mid-February, the number of new coronavirus cases reported in the Bay Area each week has been doubling or tripling the total from the week before — a phenomenon known as exponential growth, which means the regional outbreak is on a steep, and concerning, upward trajectory.

The explosive numbers triggered the six-county shelter-in-place orders Monday, and similarly alarming reports across California spurred a statewide order Thursday.

And when they finally start to fall, the numbers will tell public health officials that they can start to relax a little, though that could be months from now.

Because so much of the Bay Area’s future hinges on the case counts, it’s troubling that they’re not actually a very reliable marker for how widespread the virus is in the community, infectious disease experts say. Nationwide testing shortages mean that only certain high-risk people — those who are seriously ill, for example — are being counted, and many hundreds or thousands of cases are overlooked.

But official counts of people who have been infected are the best data public health officials have, so they’re driving policy decisions.

“Right now we have to take this very seriously, because we need to knock these cases down to a non-exponential growth,” said Dr. Shannon Bennett, a virologist and chief of science with the California Academy of Sciences.

As of Saturday, 646 cases had been reported in the Bay Area — more than two-thirds in the past week alone. California had 1,464 cases, 74% of them in the past week.

That’s staggering growth since the virus took off in California a month ago. In the last week of February, five cases were reported in the Bay Area, according to county reports. The next week — when state and local labs first started conducting their own coronavirus tests — cases shot up by 47.

The second week of March, 154 cases were reported in the Bay Area. This past week: more than 438.

The first sign that the shelter-in-place orders are working will be a slowing of the pace of new cases. As testing increases — which should happen over the next few days and weeks — the case counts may seem to climb at an even more concerning rate.

But eventually the week-to-week numbers will steady — that’s known as reaching the inflection point — and then decline. That’s when the region may finally be able to ease up, if not abandon completely, some of the extreme social distancing measures, Bennett said.

“That’s the burning question for all of us: When will we detect the inflection point in new cases?” Bennett said. “And once we detect it, how long do we have to run over the crest of the wave before we’re on the other side?”

Erin Allday is a San Francisco Chronicle staff writer. Email: eallday@sfchronicle.com Twitter: @erinallday