BOSTON – He slammed Hot Pockets heiress Michelle Janavs for her “disingenuous” claim that she bribed college officials for the love for her daughters, then ordered her to five months in prison.

He excoriated a real estate executive from California, Toby MacFarlane, declaring there should be no more tolerance for him than a common thief "because that's what you are – a thief." MacFarlane received six months behind bars.

And when Douglas Hodge, former CEO of the major investment management firm Pimco, stood up in February to be sentenced, U.S. District Judge Nathaniel Gorton didn’t hold back either, scolding him for his "unconscionable and egregious” behavior.

"There is no term in the English language to describe your conduct better than the Yiddish term 'chutzpah,” Gorton told Hodge, who admitted to paying $850,000 over more than a decade to get four of his children into the University of Southern California and Georgetown University as fake athletic recruits.

Hodge was sentenced to a nine month prison term, the longest so far in the nation’s college admissions scandal that broke a year ago this week, rocking the foundation of higher education.

Gorton, appointed to his seat in 1992 by President George H.W. Bush, has a reputation inside the Boston federal courthouse as a stern, earnest, no-nonsense judge with a record of handing down tougher sentences than others on the bench in the U.S. District of Massachusetts.

Tough but fair, most lawyers say.

The 82-year-old has lived up to that billing in his first sentences in the blockbuster “Varsity Blues” scandal. Not only has he given three of the longest sentences so far for guilty parents – although still much shorter than what prosecutors sought and many in the public covet – he's candidly let each know he considers their conduct despicable.

College admissions scam:Judge decries ex-CEO's 'appalling' actions, sentences to longest prison term in scandal

Gorton has followed a formula: Each parent stands to hear their punishment, he pulls out prepared remarks and then bluntly shares his disgust.

Gorton's hard-hitting approach in the admissions case is significant because it could preview what's ahead for 15 parents still fighting federal charges, including "Full House" actress Lori Loughlin. While parents and college coaches who pleaded guilty and waived their rights to trials have gone before four federal judges, Gorton will preside over jury trials of parents. If found guilty later this year, they will face the judge's wrath.

College admissions scandal tracker:Who's pleaded guilty, who's gone to prison — and who's still fighting

Judge departs from sentencing guidelines

.

For most of the admissions case, which surfaced publicly a year ago when the FBI made arrests at the homes of wealthy parents who paid into a scheme led by college consultant Rick Singer, action took place in the courtroom of U.S. District Judge Indira Talwani.

Her sentences ranged from probation but no prison for businessman Peter Jan Sartorio, who paid $15,000 Singer to falsify his daughter's ACT score, to five months in prison for Augustin Huneeus Jr., a vineyard owner who paid $300,000 to Singer for both the test-cheating and recruitment plots.

More:Loughlin's attorneys say new evidence proves innocence; trial set for October

Determining universities and testing companies did not suffer monetary losses, Talwani ruled the federal sentencing guidelines used to decide prison terms should fall under the federal fraud statute, rather than a harsher commercial bribery statute sought by prosecutors. That capped sentences at no more than 6 months regardless of how many times a parents paid into the scheme or the amount of the bribe.

But Gorton has started each sentencing by citing the "unique circumstances" of the scandal as reason to depart upward from those same guidelines if he deems appropriate. He cited a clause that allows it when the primary objective of an offense was an “aggravating non-monetary objective."

Thirty-six parents are charged with making bribe payments to Singer, the mastermind of the nationwide scheme, to either fix test scores on their children’s college entrance exams or get them falsely tagged as athletic recruits to get them admitted into prestigious universities. Twenty-one have pleaded guilty.

“Although I perceive no calculable loss to USC and ACT, there was certainly was a loss to the overall educational system in this country," Gorton said during last month's sentencing of Janavs, who admitted to agreeing to pay $300,000 to get both her daughters' ACT score fixed and her older daughter admitted into the university as a volleyball recruit.

Parents cry desperate times. A judge opts for prison anyway.

Gorton said the loss, although indeterminable, "most assuredly was significant." He still sentenced Janavas below the six-month cap – matching the time Talwani gave Huneeus, whose case had similar circumstances – but went beyond it with Hodge's nine months.

Gorton made clear he would have sentenced Hodge to more than a year in prison and Janavs close to one year if not for their extensive charity work.

Unlike other cases that have gone before Gorton, prosecutors will have to prove to a jury that Loughlin and other parents are guilty. But if convicted, they will face a judge who who won't be bound by guidelines, and a judge who sees national significance in the case.

“Higher education in this country aspires to be a meritocracy," Gorton said in November as he sentenced MacFarlane, who pleaded guilty to paying $450,000 to get his daughter and son admitted into USC as fake soccer and basketball recruits.

"Those who work the hardest or make the best grades rightfully get accepted into the best schools. You had the audacity and the self-aggrandizing impudence to use your wealth to cheat and lie your way around the rules that apply to everyone else."

More:Judge calls USC dad a 'thief,' gives longest prison sentence so far in college admissions scandal

'A risky move' for parents headed for trial

Defendants who pleaded guilty got credit in their sentences for showing remorse and accepting responsibility, but the same wouldn't be granted to Loughlin and other parents set for trial. In pleading not guilty to federal charges including bribery, they've argued Singer told them their payments were "legitimate donations" to help athletic programs at universities, not bribes of college officials.

More:'Legitimate donations': Lori Loughlin attorney previews college admissions defense in court

If they are found guilty, Daniel Medwed, professor of law and criminal justice at Northeastern University, said Gorton's decision to depart from the sentencing guidelines "does not bode well for the defendants."

"Going to trial is always risky in federal court because the sentencing is so harsh if you're convicted," Medwed said. "But I think it's possibly riskier with Gorton than some other judge because of his track record of being tough on crime ... of course the defendants have a constitutional right to a jury trial, and that's a decision that's entirely up to them, but it's a risky move."

Gorton, viewed as conservative compared to his peers on the Boston bench, is a graduate of Dartmouth College and the Columbia University School Law School. A recreational hockey player to this day and an amateur actor, he is the brother of former U.S. Sen. Slade Gorton, R-Wash., who served two stints in the Senate.

The brothers hail from the family that started the Slade Gorton Seafood Company in Gloucester, Massachusetts, in 1928. Their ancestors' history in the seafood industry goes back to 1849.

Prior to his judicial appointment, Gorton practiced law in Boston for more than 25 years, including as partner and director over civil litigation at Powers & Hall, which merged with another firm after his departure.

Among his recent notable decisions – and one that upset liberals – was his 2017 ruling against extending a temporary stay on President Donald Trump's ban on travelers from seven Muslim countries. In that decision, Gorton cited the president's broad authority over immigration.

In 2018 he rejected Democratic Massachusetts Attorney General's Martha Healey's challenge of new Trump rules making it easier for employers to refuse to provide insurance coverage for certain birth control methods if they claim moral objections.

And in a win last year for Uber, Gorton ruled against a complaint from taxi companies that contended the ride-share company violated consumer protection laws when it launched in Boston.

"On the criminal side, he is tough but fair," said Mark Pearlstein, a white-collar criminal defense attorney at the Boston law firm McDermott Will & Emery and a former prosecutor who practices in federal court. "I think the defendants will get a fair trial before him, but I think in terms of his sentencing practices, he tends to impose harsher sentences on defendants than a number of other judges in that building."

Although his sentencing is generally favored by the government, Pearlstein described Gorton as thoughtful. "There's a strong moral current that runs through his comments that sort of underlines his view of sentencing."

The data bears out Gorton's tough reputation. According to the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, a data gathering organization at Syracuse University, Gorton's average prison sentence was 53.7 months during a five-year period from 2013 to 2017. That's 23.4% higher than other federal judges in Massachusetts and 14.9% higher than the national average.

More:'What makes your child entitled?' Judge takes on privilege as she sentences parents in college scam

Other Massachusetts judges ranged from 29.2 months to 57.1 months in average terms, putting Gorton on the higher end. Talwani's five-year average was 32.7 months.

“He understands his role in sentencing, and I believe his sentencing philosophy as a federal judge is to land in the middle of the bell curve nationwide,” said Roberto Braceras, a white-collar defense attorney at Goodwin Procter LLP. and former prosecutor in Washington, D.C., who clerked for Gorton after law school.

He said Gorton looks at the national data and that it's important for him to be consistent: "He might not be in the middle of the bell curve in Boston but he is with respect to his fellow federal judges."

Braceras described Gorton as a hard-working judge, who reads everything that comes before him, works long hours, loves the job and gives a fair trial.

"He will not be influenced by the media or outside factors, but he will use his own judgement and assessment of the case as a whole in determining what he thinks is an appropriate sentence," he said.

Admissions scam:Parents, feds accuse each other of 'judge shopping'

Subject of 'judge-shopping' allegations

In the admissions case, Talwani's prison sentences have been shorter than Gorton's in part because she had cases where parents paid less money into Singer's scheme. For example, she gave actress Felicity Huffman two weeks in prison for paying $15,000 to have someone cheat on her daughter's SAT exam.

In contrast, each of Gorton's defendants paid into the more expensive recruitment plot, engaged with Singer multiple times and on some occasions also took part in the testing-cheating plot.

But Gorton's name preceded him.

Weeks into the admissions case last April, he was the subject of "judge-shopping accusations" from parents' defense attorneys. They objected to prosecutors deciding to charge parents on a superseding indictment of defendant David Sidoo, a Vancouver businessman and parent whose case had already been assigned to Gorton.

Parents' attorneys signed a letter to the chief judge of the U.S. District Court of Massachusetts that said their clients had no connection to Sidoo, calling it a "a clear form of judge shopping." They asked for their individual cases to be assigned randomly to judges.

U.S. Attorney Andrew Lelling responded: "What counsel fail to say – but of course mean – is that they want a different judge because they perceive Judge Gorton as imposing longer sentences in criminal cases than other judges in his district; if this matter had been drawn to a judge viewed as more favorable to the defense, counsel would not have sent the letter."

Lelling called the letter a "Hail Mary by people who know better."

The objections didn't work, and the case remained with Gorton, who last month set two separate trials of two groups of parents, one in October and one in January. It came with words directed at both sides.

“Needless to say this is a high-profile case, but it is not going to be tried in the newspaper or the internet," Gorton said. He warned there "will be consequences" if constraint is not shown in that regard.

Reach Joey Garrison and on Twitter @joeygarrison.