If some of the last names among the 2020 NFL draft class look and sound familiar, it's because they belong to prospects who are the progeny of past NFL stars.

It's not uncommon for the son of a former player to follow in his father's footsteps to the NFL, and this year's class features several prospects who can realize their own dreams later this month.

LSU TE Thaddeus Moss (father: Hall of Fame WR Randy Moss)

Moss emerged as one of Joe Burrow's key targets, as the Heisman Trophy winner and likely No. 1 top choice found the 6-foot-3, 250-pound tight end for three scores in LSU's two College Football Playoff victories.

Of course, his pops knows plenty about catching touchdowns, too.

More:Thaddeus Moss on different NFL path than one his father set

Minnesota S Antoine Winfield Jr. (father: CB Antoine Winfield Sr.)

Winfield Sr. was a first-round pick and three-time Pro Bowler over his 14-year career in the league, nine of those seasons spent with the Minnesota Vikings.

His son, a safety instead of a corner, played his college ball locally and became one of the more promising defensive backs in this class.

More:Antoine Winfield Jr. wants to make name for himself

USC WR Michael Pittman Jr. (father: RB Michael Pittman)

The elder Pittman went in the fourth round of the 1998 draft and went on to win a Super Bowl with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. He finished with 5,627 rushing yards during his 11-year career.

The younger Pittman will likely be drafted higher. As a senior, the 6-4, 223-pound target stood out in a middling USC offense, catching 101 balls for 1,275 yards and 11 touchdowns.

Michigan OL Jon Runyan Jr. (father: OL Jon Runyan)

Runyan Jr. first followed his dad by picking Michigan, but he's a late-round pick if he's selected at all. The elder Runyan was a fourth-round pick who became an All-Pro and one of the game's most dominant linemen in the 2000s.

Florida WR Van Jefferson (father: WR Shawn Jefferson)

This father-son duo actually has the same legal name (Vanchi LaShawn Jefferson), but they go by different first names. Shawn, who played 13 years in the NFL and is currently the New York Jets' wide receivers coach, was a ninth-round pick, back when drafts had that many rounds. Safe to say Van will be taken higher.

Tennessee S Nigel Warrior (father: CB Dale Carter)

Warrior was a consensus first-team All-SEC selection in 2019 when he recorded four interceptions. Carter played for five teams (1992-2005) and picked off seven passes during his rookie season with the Kansas City Chiefs.

Texas WR Collin Johnson (father: DB Johnnie Johnson)

Johnnie Johnson was the 17th overall pick in the 1980 draft. He played for the Los Angeles Rams (1980-88) and Seattle Seahawks (1989) and is in the College Football Hall of Fame. A hamstring injury limited Collin in 2019, but the 6-6, 222-pound pass catcher was a key piece of the offense in the three prior seasons for the Longhorns.

Georgia DB J.R. Reed (father: WR Jake Reed)

Jake played 12 seasons in the league between the Vikings and New Orleans Saints and scored 36 touchdowns with nearly 7,000 receiving yards. J.R. decided to return for his senior season with the Bulldogs in 2019 and snagged first-team All-SEC honors, joining his cousin Nigel Warrior on the list.

TCU WR Jalen Reagor (father: DL Montae Reagor)

Montae won a Super Bowl with the Indianapolis Colts and was the 58th overall pick out of Texas Tech in 1999. Jalen could be taken earlier than that, as his 4.47-second 40-yard dash at the combine was enough to impress teams looking for a big-play receiver.

North Carolina OL Charlie Heck (father: OL Andy Heck)

Andy carved out quite the career (12 years) for himself as the No. 15 pick in 1989 out of Notre Dame. He also just won the Super Bowl as Andy Reid's offensive line coach in Kansas City. Charlie has only been playing tackle since his senior year of high school.