CLOSE Skyline High School seniors picked up their caps and gowns at the school Tuesday, knowing they will likely not get to wear them at an actual ceremony. Arizona Republic

The green cap and gown that 18-year-old Shelbie Rash intended on wearing to her graduation from Skyline High School in Mesa in May is the same one her four older siblings donned for their commencements.

She recently took the cap and gown out for her senior pictures, but told The Arizona Republic it was "gut-wrenching" to know she likely wouldn't be putting it back on for a ceremony alongside her 520-student cohort because of the new coronavirus outbreak.

Rash and her best friend cried over the phone together when they got the news that in-person classes would be canceled through the end of the semester, but she said she's been uplifted by the camaraderie among all of those graduating this spring in unfortunate circumstances.

"We won't sugarcoat anything – it really, really sucks – but it's been really nice to watch the class of 2020 really band together and spread so much positivity, especially through social media," Rash said. "This isn't just a Skyline class of 2020 thing, this isn't just an Arizona class of 2020 thing, this is all over the world, so that's brought me a little bit of comfort."

For more stories that matter: Click here to subscribe to azcentral.com.

The high school on Tuesday allowed students to return to campus and pick up their caps and gowns, though they had to stay in their vehicles and wait for a Balfour representative, who wore gloves and a camouflage scarf over his mouth and nose, to bring them their regalia.

"It's a way to give the students some sense of normalcy, or some sense of that tradition because they really have lost so much this year," Principal Tom Brennan said. "Whatever we can salvage from our normal traditions, that's what we're trying to do."

Excited students waved out of the passenger side window to the several school administrators, including Brennan, whom they typically see five days a week but at that point hadn't seen in a month. The administrators chatted with students through their windows as they waited in line to get some of the final relics of their high school careers.

"... They'll remember this for the rest of their lives, for how it marred, disrupted, impacted what normally should be a really important American rite of passage," Brennan said.

Brennan, whose 18-year-old son, Sean, is also graduating from Skyline this year, encouraged seniors to still get their caps and gowns and celebrate their achievement in whatever way they can.

He's also told his son to focus on positive things, like gearing up to attend Arizona State University in the fall, adding that he hoped others in his son's situation would do the same.

"It's all about trying to help those young adults see the potential of what's next," Brennan said. "Acknowledge their grieving, acknowledge their sadness and anger, but prop them up and get them ready for what's next."

Ayden Clytus, 17, picked up her cap and gown on Tuesday and said it's been "weird" to experience high school milestones without the pomp and circumstance that would normally accompany them.

Her father, Mark Clytus, tried to make the best of the situation by decorating his truck with a banner that would celebrate Ayden as they went to pick up her graduation attire.

"Being a dad ... I'm just so excited — I don't have the words to explain it," he said. "She's my first child and it's just seeing her as she grew up and reminiscing and now she's about to be off in the world on her own, I just needed to take the moment and be happy for her."

Clytus, who takes AP and dual-enrollment classes on top of several extracurricular activities, could have graduated early but opted to return this semester specifically to participate in things like prom and graduation — which at this point, may not happen.

"For me, it's been tough — it makes me feel selfish (because) I know there's people going through harder situations," she said.

The tough situation, though, has been made better by looking toward the future, Clytus said.

In the weeks since she started completing her senior year online, she was notified that she would be able to attend ASU through the President Barack Obama Scholars Program, which she said gave her "so much relief."

She's also been feeling the love and support from her family and community, describing this period as a "blip" in her life that precedes "better experiences."

"It'll probably always be something I think about, but it's something I can recover from," she said.

Reach the reporter at bfrank@arizonarepublic.com or 602-444-8529. Follow her on Twitter @brieannafrank.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/mesa/2020/04/14/arizona-high-school-seniors-mourn-loss-traditions-but-celebrate-camaraderie-skyline-high-school/2991110001/