At the outset of Donald Trump’s presidency, many ethics experts urged him to divest himself of his far-flung business empire, but he refused. | Nicholas Kamm/AFP/Getty Images Legal Lawsuit accusing Trump of violating Constitution gets hostile reception

RICHMOND — A federal appeals court panel was indisputably hostile Tuesday to a lawsuit accusing President Donald Trump of violating the Constitution by profiting from his business dealings with foreign countries seeking to curry favor with his administration.

The uphill battle the suit faces was evident before the arguments even began Tuesday morning when it was revealed that all three 4th Circuit Court of Appeals judges assigned to the case are GOP appointees, including two of the court’s most conservative jurists.

Advertisement

One of those judges suggested that the suit could be a precursor to attempting to drive the president from office through impeachment. And two of the judges came close to accusing the Maryland-based district court judge handling the suit, Clinton-appointee Peter Messitte, of impropriety for trying to engineer the challenge rather than responding to legal issues presented to him by the officials who brought the suit: the attorneys general of Maryland and Washington, D.C.

The arguments in the so-called foreign emoluments case test largely uncharted areas of constitutional law, but also serve as a reminder of the numerous ethical challenges Trump’s administration has faced, with a series of Cabinet members departing under clouds of scandal. Maryland and D.C. jointly brought the emoluments case in 2017.

Of the three appeals judges who heard more than two hours of arguments Tuesday, Judge Dennis Shedd sounded most skeptical about the case, challenging lawyers for D.C. and Maryland at every turn. Shedd pressed D.C. Solicitor General Loren AliKhan on what her office was looking to get out of the suit beyond a declaration that Trump is breaking the law.

“Do you think that will be a basis for a high crime or misdemeanor for impeachment?” asked Shedd, an appointee of President George W. Bush.

POLITICO Playbook newsletter Sign up today to receive the #1-rated newsletter in politics Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

“I don’t,” AliKhan replied.

Shedd suggested that Trump was being put in a no-win situation, where if he made more aggressive efforts to avoid business from foreign sources he would face further litigation.

“If he then said — a little reminiscent of the travel ban — no foreigners can stay in any of my properties, how long before the State of Maryland would sue him for discrimination?” the judge asked. “What you want to do is make it a guessing game for him.”

Judge Paul Niemeyer called Messitte's handling of the case in the lower court “very peculiar.” Niemeyer noted that the district judge suggested early in the case that D.C. and Maryland might need to name the president personally as a defendant, rather than just in his official capacity as president. They then did that. Later, Messitte inquired about dismissing the president personally from the suit and the plaintiffs soon did that.

“It sounds like the court was doing something beyond just responding to the parties,” said Niemeyer, an appointee of President George H.W. Bush.

“Does that not look like the district court is somehow involved in guiding this?” Shedd asked. “It looks a little bit odd.”

Shedd also ridiculed Maryland’s argument that Trump’s actions were undermining the basic terms under which the state agreed to join the union in 1788.

“I hope that if the courts disagree with you, you’re not thinking about seceding from the union, are you?” Shedd asked.

“I confess, I am from the District of Columbia, so I don’t think I’d be allowed to secede,” AliKhan said.

“Well, I don‘t know, some people might let you,” Shedd quipped.

Curiously, it was the sole Trump appointee on the panel — A. Marvin Quattlebaum Jr. — who was the most reserved during Tuesday’s arguments. While he similarly seemed more receptive to the president’s arguments than those of the plaintiffs, he refrained from the verbal fusillades his colleagues repeatedly unleashed on the lawyers for Maryland and D.C.

At the 4th Circuit, the so-called “draw” of judges is not announced until shortly before arguments begin. As lawyers filed in, those pressing the case against Trump seemed aware that selection had gone about as poorly as it could for their side.

Maryland Attorney General Brian Frosh slapped his own forehead with his hand, prompting D.C. Attorney General Karl Racine to console him. “Head up, head up,” Racine told his colleague.

During Tuesday’s arguments, the judges also questioned whether allowing the suit to proceed could expose other presidents to litigation over foreign sales of their books or even over their receipt of interest on U.S. treasury bills. A constitutional provision, they noted, arguably prohibits any government payment to a president beyond his or her salary.

AliKhan called those cases “at the margins” and not comparable to Trump’s decision to continue to profit from his businesses. “What we have is a president who holds a massive global empire who has solicited foreign business,” she said.

While the suit has now been narrowed to issues surrounding foreign-government patronage of the Trump International Hotel in Washington, Shedd noted that the issues D.C. and Maryland raised went well beyond that hotel or even real estate.

“You even asked that he be fired from ‘The Apprentice,’” Shedd observed, apparently referring to allegations that television rights for the TV show were paid for by government-owned foreign broadcasters.

At the outset of Trump’s presidency, many ethics experts urged him to divest himself of his far-flung business empire, but he refused. Instead, Trump turned over day-to-day control of his businesses to two of his sons, Donald Trump Jr. and Eric Trump.

Just before taking office, Trump announced that he would donate to the U.S. Treasury all profits from foreign government-related business at his hotels and other enterprises. However, critics said the policy was vague and certain not to capture all the income Trump derived from foreign diplomats and others with ties to governments abroad.

Last March, the Trump Organization announced that it had donated just over $151,000 to the U.S. Treasury to divest what the firm said were its profits associated with foreign-government business.

However, the Trump business has said it intends to respect its guests’ privacy and not pry into who might be footing the bill for their stays at Trump hotels. As a result, it’s unclear if Trump’s firms are disgorging profits from hotel rooms booked by lobbyists or other third parties who may not disclose any connection to foreign governments.

For instance, during Trump’s inauguration in 2017, lobbyists working for the Saudi government paid more than $270,000 to put U.S. veterans up in hotel rooms at the Trump hotel in D.C. The move was part of an effort to defeat legislation that allows victims to pursue lawsuits against the Saudi regime over its alleged involvement in the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the U.S.

While the main focus of the lawsuit has been on the influence foreign governments could wield through their patronage of Trump businesses, it also targets the money Trump-branded hotels and other ventures are receiving from state officials. A lesser-known clause of the Constitution prohibits the president from being separately compensated by any state.

Lawyers in the Maryland and D.C. case have noted that some state officials have signaled that they’re staying at Trump’s D.C. hotel in order to cozy up to the administration. In 2017, Maine's Gov. Paul LePage stayed there during a visit to Washington. The Trump administration later eased logging restrictions Maine had objected to.

While Trump has faced at least four lawsuits alleging his illegal receipt of foreign gifts related to his office, the D.C. and Maryland suit had previously seemed to present the biggest legal headache of the bunch. That’s because last December, Messitte gave the D.C. and Maryland attorneys general the go-ahead to begin discovery — the process of seeking documents and testimony about how much money the Trump hotel is making from foreign sources, the U.S. government and state governments.

The 4th Circuit put that discovery process on hold last December at the Justice Department’s request until the appeal is resolved.

Last October, a New York-based federal appeals court heard arguments in the first lawsuit filed over the emoluments issue — a case brought by the liberal watchdog group Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington. A district court judge in New York threw out that case in December 2017, ruling that the watchdog group and other plaintiffs in the hospitality industry lacked the legal standing to pursue their claims.

The 2nd Circuit Court of Appeals panel has yet to rule on efforts to revive that suit.

Meanwhile, a suit that more than 200 Democratic lawmakers brought over the emoluments issue remains alive in a federal court in Washington. Last September, a judge found that the lawmakers did have legal standing to sue , but the case has proceeded at a glacial pace.

The Democratic House members may now have a more potent tool to explore Trump’s business dealings: congressional subpoenas. With Democrats taking control of the House in January, the chairs of various House committees could try to use their legal authority to demand more details on Trump’s business dealings.

The House Oversight Committee made limited inquiries into the issue while under GOP control in 2017 and recently renewed its push to get the Trump Organization to turn over more records of its policy on foreign government-related business.

The case argued Tuesday involved several notable procedural quirks. Late last year, Messitte refused to give the Justice Department leave to appeal his decisions to reject a motion to dismiss the case. As a result of that refusal, government lawyers are seeking an unusual form of relief known as mandamus, which typically requires a clearer showing than that needed in an ordinary appeal.

At one point, Quattlebaum questioned whether the discovery Messitte approved — subpoenas aimed at private businesses including the Trump Organization — is so intrusive that the appeals court should get involved at this juncture.

“Are we at the point where we are at a crisis?” the judge asked.

Lawyers representing Trump in his personal capacity also filed a notice of appeal after Messitte went seven months without acting on their motion to dismiss Trump individually as a defendant in the case. Since Messitte never ruled on that issue, it’s unclear whether there was any decision to appeal from. The situation is complicated further by the fact that D.C. and Maryland later filed a notice purporting to drop the case against Trump personally.

“The posture of this case … is kind of convoluted, I think everybody would agree,” Shedd said.