This particular test drive didn’t turn out as I hoped, but it had nothing to do with the 2020 Honda Pilot. The vehicle was amazing. The biggest problem was not getting to spend more time in it.

On most test drives, I like to plan a driving trip that challenges the performance of the vehicle and also shows off some of Utah’s amazing scenery. This time, I planned a trip to the West Desert and Fish Springs National Wildlife Refuge for the following day. Those plans were hijacked, though, when my daughter-in-law, who was stranded in Utah by the pandemic, needed to get back to Washington and didn’t want to fly. So we ended up driving to Baker City, Oregon, to meet my son so he could take his wife home to Tacoma.

I wish we’d been able to take the Honda Pilot for the 15-hour trip. It would have been a more comfortable and overall better experience. But I didn’t think Honda would appreciate me returning a new vehicle with more than 1,000 miles on it.

With less time available the following day, we did a drive around the far side of Utah Lake. I also drove the Pilot up American Fork Canyon which is very close to home. I loved everything about the Pilot, but the test drive uncovered a major problem: My wife and family also loved the vehicle, so for the next few years, I’m sure to be reminded repeatedly about how nice it would be to own one.

Flint Stephens

I had the Touring model for this test, which includes standard features like 20-inch wheels, ambient interior lighting, a rear entertainment system, a Wi-Fi hotspot, a hands-free power tailgate and more. The test model also had second-row captain’s seats and all-wheel drive.

"A midsize crossover SUV with three rows of seats, lots of passenger room, and plenty of cargo space, the Pilot is immensely practical," according to J.D. Power. "It also enjoys a strong reputation for reliability and resale value and gets favorable safety ratings."

Comfort, space and visibility

We had four adults and two children in the Pilot for the trip around Utah Lake. Everyone had ample room and the driver’s seat was comfortable and supportive. There was also good cargo space, which is important for a vehicle used to haul a family.

Flint Stephens

"The Pilot's high seating position makes for a commanding view of the road, while large windows and thin, unobtrusive roof pillars make for best-in-class visibility," reports Car and Driver. That was certainly the experience I had while driving it.

Depending on the configuration you choose, the Pilot can handle seven or eight passengers and its roominess means even a full capacity, all the passengers will be able to travel in comfort.

Great for a family vehicle

My wife and I are empty-nesters, but the two grandchildren who rode with us loved the built-in entertainment system and it would be a lifesaver on a long trip. Every passenger also had a cupholder, which is a necessity when traveling with a family.

J.D. Power reports, "From a feature perspective, the Pilot’s 8-inch infotainment system shines. You get Apple CarPlay, Android Auto, text-messaging capability, satellite radio, HD Radio, and a quick-charge USB port. Cabin Control is also part of this system, allowing rear passengers to have smartphone-app remote control over various vehicle settings."

The Pilot also had some other thoughtful features like a sunscreen that pulled up from the rear windows to help keep backseat occupants cooler.

Flint Stephens

Solid safety features

I love the safety features included in many of today’s vehicles. The Pilot has adaptive cruise control, automated emergency braking, collision warning and lane-keeping assist. The lane departure warning shows up as a light on the display and it also sends a slight shimmy to the steering wheel. I like it much more than an annoying beep or buzz.

The 2020 Honda Pilot also earned a five-star crash-test rating from the National Highway Transportation Safety Administration (NHTSA).

Nice ride and handling

I would have loved to test the Pilot on my original route that included some gravel roads. On the freeway, Utah Lake blacktop and canyon roads, it was easy to drive. For a larger SUV, the handling was smooth and responsive.

Edmunds.com reports, "The Pilot is surprisingly capable when driven on twisty roads. And while we're not totally enamored with the optional nine-speed automatic transmission, there's no doubt the standard V6 has plenty of power to move this large crossover."

Fuel economy for the Pilot is rated as best in its class with an EPA rating of 19 mpg around town and 26 mpg on the highway.

One other factor important to many families is the Pilot Touring model with all-wheel drive has a towing capacity of 5,000 pounds, giving it the ability to haul a boat or small trailer.

For Beehive State families who need room for kids, safety and reliability, the Honda Pilot certainly deserves consideration.

Make sure and take the quiz below to see how much you know about Honda and for a chance to win a $50 Maverik gas card!

×

Photos