President Trump’s “Opening Up America Again” plan, on paper is a good, cautious, not over-reaching plan of how a nation wracked by a terrible virus with no vaccine should begin to loosen social and economic restrictions.

On paper, it’s a good plan. But there’s a lot of “depends” in there.

For example, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, one of the “wide open” places the president seemed to envision from his podium, contains the hottest and biggest hot spot in America for COVID-19. The Smithfield port processing plant has suffered 733 cases to date, according to The New York Times.

Its hourly wage employees are typically low-earning immigrants, making anywhere from $12.75 to nearly $20 an hour. This kind of business, which is deemed essential, whether it’s meat packing or distribution or toilet paper production, exists all over the country. And despite the countermeasures companies deploy to fight the virus and keep it out, when it does get in, it can quickly devastate a workplace and the surrounding community.

Fully 44 percent of all the cases in South Dakota center around this one plant. Certainly, the management at Smithfield bears responsibility for making some poor choices when one employee tested positive on March 24. And working with the CDC, Smithfield is trying to figure out how to reopen the plant. There will be repercussions: the union is making noises that the company didn’t act fast enough to deploy countermeasures, but instead focused on increasing production to meet surging demand.

Take this case in microcosm, and multiply it all over the country, as businesses which have been shuttered need to figure out how to safely open, and some will open despite clear indications they shouldn’t (employees who have relatives at home fighting the virus, for instance, or allowing an employee who says they feel run down but don’t have a 100.4 fever to work).

Trump’s (I call it Trump’s because he will take the credit or the blame come November, no matter who actually wrote the plan) plan is cautious, and represents the best approach to federal guidelines for opening up the economy.

In phases, state and local officials must be able to accurately measure case counts, which means adequate testing, and demonstrate a downward trajectory of cases in a 14-day period. Employers must provide PPE, temperature checks, testing and isolating referrals, and other countermeasures. Most businesses currently open (the “essential” businesses) have these countermeasures, but the ones that closed will have to quickly get up to speed.

Phase One allows parks and other public areas to open, with crowds of under 10 people or allow proper social distancing. It suggests telework, closed common areas (like break rooms), and minimizing non-essential travel. Restaurants can re-open with proper social distancing (take half the tables out, and definitely no seating at the bar). Bars themselves have to remain closed, while gyms can reopen with limits on the number of people allowed in, and lots of wipes to wipe down equipment.

Phase Two, if Phase One is successful, in place for several weeks, and the downward trend continues, allows more opening. However, if Phase One results in a hotspot or a resurgence of the virus, this brings everyone back to lockdown. Phase Two is when bars can reopen, thought with “diminished standing-room capacity.” Movie theaters can re-open (if anyone will go is a different matter), with similar restrictions. Schools and youth sports can re-open.

If Phase Two is successful, and the downward trend continues, Phase Three begins to look like “normal” life. Everyone can go back to work, with social distancing recommended.

The chance of anyone reaching Phase Three by the end of the summer seems to me to be remote. I have significant questions:

First, if an area achieves Phase Three early (the fastest it can happen is about mid-June), then what will prevent a flood of people coming in from adjacent or nearby areas still locked down to enjoy the freedom? Seriously, if a mall, or a park, or a summer camp is wide open and enjoying a virus-free existence, will the local police seal off the town to keep others out? Is it legal to do that?

Second, all it takes is one bad decision by management of a business to start another hot spot. One infection leads to 2.3 to 3 more every day when things start to open up. Hot spots can spread for a week before officials even realize there’s a hot spot. Testing, if immediately available, tracing, isolation and testing, need to be at the absolute top of their game in every Phase Three location. No exceptions.

The first place to go Phase Three will be watched like a baby eagle’s nest on a webcam.

In fact, the first places to go Phase One or Phase Two will be similarly watched, and the moment one slides back to lockdown, the rest of the nation will react by extending the fear.

While on paper, Trump’s plan seems rational, reasonable, and well organized, in practice, it will be a collection of fits and starts, one step forward and two steps back events, new hotspots, factories opening and then closing again, small towns seemingly free from the virus getting suddenly slammed, and waves of fear spreading after collective jubilant celebrations.

Even China, which proudly opened its movie theaters in late March, promptly closed them again, because “too soon” is too soon, even if you have a perfect plan on paper.

I’m glad the federal government came out with a plan, because we need one. We need guidelines. And on paper, it makes perfect sense. But as we know, it only takes a few mistakes to bring down the best plans.

It looks to me like we won’t be hugging, going to movies, or the mall, for quite a while. But at least we’ll have something to shoot for–and for that, I’m grateful.