BOSTON – One year ago Thursday, FBI agents raided million-dollar homes belonging to a who's-who among the rich and elite, in some cases entering mansions early in the morning with guns drawn.

They arrested major financial investors, real estate developers, CEOs, a partner of an international law firm, a Napa Valley vineyard owner, an heiress to the company that makes Hot Pockets, celebrated college coaches and dozens more.

Also taken into custody: two famous actresses, Felicity Huffman and Lori Loughlin.

It was the culmination of an unprecedented federal investigation dubbed "Varsity Blues." Authorities say they uncovered a sprawling scheme in which wealthy parents made six-figure payments to Rick Singer, a college consultant from Newport Beach, California. He used the money get their children into some of the country's most prestigious universities, the feds say – paying bribes and falsifying test scores and applications.

At a stunning news conference in Boston, federal prosecutors announced the largest prosecution of admissions cheating in U.S. history – a subject so juicy it quickly became the subject of a Lifetime movie, podcasts and books.

Now, 12 months later, legal experts say the Justice Department has proved successful on several fronts. Chief among them: Federal prosecutors have obtained guilty pleas from more than half of the 53 defendants. And while prison sentences have been measured in months instead of years, criminal justice advocates and legal experts say the blockbuster case has likely delivered a message to others considering similar crimes.

Scandal tracker:Who has pleaded guilty, who has gone to prison, and who's still fighting

"The sentences likely have been shorter than some may have liked, but the fact that these individuals are being held accountable is what's most critical," said Kristen Clarke, president and executive director of the Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law. "These federal convictions should be a powerful deterrent to the other bad actors who feel like their privilege and status places them above the law."

But with two trials of parents – and a separate trial of coaches and suspected Singer conspirators – still looming, it's still unclear how the blockbuster case will be ultimately viewed in the public eye.

Parents' defense attorneys have pushed back from the beginning, calling prosecutors overzealous and unfair by misportraying the actions and intent of parents. Instead, attorneys say, these parents believed they were making "legitimate donations" to a nonprofit operated by Singer.

It's not too late for that defense to prevail. If Loughlin, for instance, is found not guilty, the fate of lower-profile rich people who have already been sentenced is likely to escape the public's memory.

Lori Loughlin's trial:As college admissions scandal turns 1, meet the tough judge Loughlin, other parents will face

The indictments last March, originally targeting 50 defendants, kicked off a year of courtroom drama that's now poised to stretch into 2021 with the trials.

Two paths: One for the rich, one for the rest

The case lifted the curtain into an underworld of college admissions, revealing a previously unknown plot for the affluent and well-connected to game the system and circumvent the rules. Parents, prosecutors say, paid Singer either to have someone fix their children's ACT or SAT test scores or have them designated as fake athletic recruits in largely unnoticed sports such as water polo, crew and beach volleyball. Singer's cooperation with prosecutors led them to parents.

Putting the Hollywood connection aside, the case took on national significance for a more fundamental reason. Education advocates said it shed light into systemic inequity: two pathways into higher education, one for the wealthy and another for everyone else.

'How do we rebuild trust?' A year after admissions scandal, presidents say college must change

By several metrics, the case has been an overwhelming success for Andrew Lelling, U.S. attorney for the District of Massachusetts:

Thirty-one out of 53 defendants have pleaded guilty to charges instead of going to trial. Parents who were quick to admit to crimes pleaded guilty to fraud conspiracy charges; others also pleaded guilty to money laundering. Parents who have so far refused plea deals also face bribery charges.

Fifteen out of 17 defendants sentenced so far have received some amount of prison time.

That includes 14 out of 15 parents who have been sentenced, including one defendant, Douglas Hodge, former president of Pimco, who got the longest sentence of nine months.

The longest sentence:Judge sentences ex-CEO to longest prison term in college admissions scandal, decries 'appalling' actions

But the feds suffered a setback when U.S. District Judge Indira Talwani ruled the federal fraud statute must be used to guide sentencings rather than the harsher commercial bribery statute.

From the outset, prosecutors said they wanted to "send a message" to deter others from committing similar acts. The judge's decision delivered a blow to the Justice Department's push for multiyear sentences for parents and instead capped many prison terms at no more than six months.

Fifteen parents and seven coaches, athletic administrators and other Singer associates still await jury trials. They include Loughlin and her fashion designer husband Mossimo Giannulli, who are accused of paying Singer and staff at the University of Southern California $500,000 to get their two daughters falsely tagged as crew recruits to get them admitted.

"I think so far they can claim they've enjoyed a fair amount of success, but a lot will depend on these trials that come up," said Carl Tobias, a law professor at the University of Richmond School of Law. "But my guess is they will also see a lot of plea deals before they get to the trials."

'Self-aggrandizing impudence'

He said he believes the "message has gotten out" that such behavior is not acceptable.

"Of course, it's hard to know because we don't know what people are doing – whether they've heard about it and how this filters through society," Tobias said. "But my sense is the kind of people who have the kind of cash to engage in this kind of activity read the papers."

The U.S. Attorney's Office declined to comment for this story.

All four judges and one federal magistrate who have presided over the cases have recognized the wide impact on the education system.

"I think the question that people need to ask is, what makes your children entitled to a side door (into college)?" Talwani said before sentencing Stephen Semprevivo, a former executive at sales firm Cydcor, to four months of prison. Semprevivo paid Singer $400,000 to get his son into Georgetown University as a fake tennis recruit.

Similarly, Judge Nathaniel Gorton told Toby MacFarlane, a former real estate and title insurance executive: "Higher education in this country aspires to be a meritocracy. Those who work the hardest or make the best grades rightfully get accepted into the best schools.

"You had the audacity and the self-aggrandizing impudence to use your wealth to cheat and lie your way around the rules that apply to everyone else."

A public corruption agenda for U.S. attorney

For Lelling, a 2017 appointee of President Donald Trump in Democrat-heavy Boston, the admissions scandal came amid a series of high-profile cases: the conviction of pharmaceutical company executives in a major fentanyl bribery case; convictions (later overturned) of two Boston City Hall employees for extortion; charges against a state judge for allowing an undocumented immigrant to evade federal officials; charges against the Massachusetts state police union president on suspicion of misusing dues; and a guilty plea from a gas company that caused a deadly explosion in 2018.

Daniel Medwed, professor of law at Northeastern University, called the severity of sentences "relatively benign" when compared with low-level drug offenders, for example, who are put behind bars for years. Huffman served just 11 days in prison in October for paying $15,000 to have someone change answers on the SAT exam of her daughters.

Parents who paid small amounts to Singer to take part in the test-cheating scheme have gotten significantly shorter sentences than parents who paid into the recruiting plot.

But the key metric on grading the success of the government's case is not so much individual sentences but deterring others from doing the same, Medwed said. He said he believes the government has accomplished that by pushing ahead such a large-scale investigation.

"What is really noble about this prosecution is this idea that no one is above the law – that the wealthy and the famous, who are constantly living in a world of privilege and are used to sort of getting their way, that they are actually accountable," Medwed said. "It's a really important part of viewing this a success. It's a deterrent to everyone, but it's also a firm message that the elite won't get a pass as they so often do in our system."

Still, defense attorneys for coaches allegedly bribed in the scheme have said prosecutors are overreaching.

Lori Loughlin's trial:Attorneys say new evidence proves innocence; trial set for October

They have called out the feds' "unprecedented attempt" to charge coaches under the federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, or RICO – traditionally used to prosecute the Mafia and other organized gang activity.

The Justice Department has argued each coach was part of the same criminal enterprise led by Singer. But defense attorneys countered their clients coordinated with Singer, but not one another. Defense attorneys for coaches at Georgetown, Wake Forest and USC have said defendants' actions were "siloed," "parallel" and "uncoordinated," warranting dismissal of the government's case

Attorneys for parents, including Loughlin, say Singer told his clients their payments were going toward collegiate athletic programs, not bribing university officials.

For example, in court filings, lawyers for Miami developer Robert Zangrillo have argued that USC operated a pay-to-play system that included a "VIP" list to prioritize the admissions of large donors. Payments to Singer were donations "indistinguishable" from other donations received by USC, they argued.

In a win for USC parents, federal Magistrate Page Kelley last week ordered USC to disclose unredacted admissions-related emails and other documents subpoenaed by Zangrillo. The judge said USC "has made misleading representations about its admissions practices."

While the university has said donations are not included in an applicant's file, Kelley wrote "that message is belied" by other facts that have arisen.

These and other questions will be at the center of the trial for Loughlin, Giannulli and six other parents set to begin in October. A second group of seven parents will go on trial in January. Dates aren't set for the trials of coaches and Singer's associates.

Reach Joey Garrison on Twitter: @joeygarrison.