Editor’s note: This story has been updated since it was first published.

A special guest welcomed Lauren Cox to the WNBA on Friday night.

After Cox was drafted No. 3 overall by the Indiana Fever, five-time NBA All-Star Kevin Love from the Cleveland Cavaliers joined the ESPN broadcast to talk to the former Flower Mound and Baylor star.

“Just want to say congratulations. I know you’re going through an amazing time right now,” Love said. “I can remember getting drafted back in 2008 and how fast it flew by, so I just say take a deep breath and enjoy it with your friends and family. I look forward to what you do in the future. Big fan.”

It was a nice surprise for Cox after the hometown Dallas Wings passed on her and picked Oregon forward Satou Sabally at No. 2. Oregon point guard Sabrina Ionescu, the consensus national player of the year, was taken by the New York Liberty at No. 1.

“I have never met him, but he’s always been a player that I’ve watched and kind of molded my game after a little bit,” Cox said of Love. “That was really awesome, really unexpected.”

The draft was conducted virtually because of the coronavirus pandemic, and commissioner Cathy Engelbert announced the picks live on ESPN. The top prospects took part remotely, and Cox watched the draft at home with her family.

“I was really nervous, and finally hearing my name called kind of calmed all of those nerves,” Cox said. “Then my sisters threw confetti on me and we hugged it out. It was really fun. We made the most of it.”

Two Dallas-area players were among the first four picks, as All-American guard Chennedy Carter from Mansfield Timberview and Texas A&M was picked by the Atlanta Dream at No. 4. Texas forward Joyner Holmes, who was a McDonald’s All-American at Cedar Hill, was drafted by the Seattle Storm with the seventh pick in the second round — No. 19 overall.

Cox just missed making a bit of history. The highest that a Dallas-area player has been selected in the WNBA draft was No. 2, which is where Odyssey Sims from Irving MacArthur and Baylor was chosen in 2014 and where home-schooled Moriah Jefferson from Glenn Heights and UConn went in 2016.

Cox was drafted at the same spot that former Duncanville superstar Tamika Catchings was picked at in 2001. Catchings, a 10-time WNBA All-Star and four-time Olympic gold medalist, is a member of the 2020 Class that will be enshrined into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.

Cox will be seeing a lot of Catchings, who is the Fever’s vice president of basketball operations and general manager. What’s more, Cox will get to play for the Fever’s new head coach, Marianne Stanley, who won a WNBA championship last season as an assistant coach for the Washington Mystics.

Cox overcame a lot to become a first-team All-American in 2020.

The 6-4 forward has Type 1 diabetes, meaning that she has to manage her diet and insulin intake. Cox had to take two months off from basketball after recovering from a torn meniscus and bone bruise in her knee that she suffered in an 82-81 win over Notre Dame in the 2019 national championship game.

Cox came back strong and averaged 12.5 points, 8.4 rebounds, 3.6 assists and ranked fourth in the Big 12 in blocks (2.7 per game) as a senior. Baylor didn’t get a chance to win a second straight national championship, as the Big 12 and NCAA tournaments were canceled because of the COVID-19 outbreak.

Carter, who chose to forgo her senior year to enter the draft, was the first A&M player to earn All-America honors her first three years of college. She leaves A&M as the second leading scorer in school history.

“I feel like this is my moment ... my time is here, and I’m ready,” Carter said on the ESPN broadcast. “I’ve just been consistently staying in the gym and working on things I know I don’t do well.”

Carter, nicknamed Hollywood on social media, is a high-volume scorer and ranked sixth in the nation in scoring as a junior, averaging 21.3 points. She averaged 22.5 points for her career, with a career-high 23.3 points per game as a sophomore, and she set a Texas A&M single-game record with 46 points against USC in 2017.

Carter becomes a teammate of former Irving MacArthur and Baylor star Alexis Jones on the Dream. Jones, the No. 12 overall pick in the 2017 draft, was claimed off waivers by the Dream in February after the 5-9 guard averaged 4.0 points and 1.8 assists in 12.2 minutes per game for the Los Angeles Sparks last season.

The last D-FW player drafted in the first round was Ariel Atkins from Duncanville and Texas. She was picked at No. 7 in 2018 by the Mystics and won a WNBA championship with the team in 2019.

Holmes joins a Seattle team that re-signed 2018 WNBA MVP Breanna Stewart and three-time WNBA champion Sue Bird. The Storm won the WNBA title in 2018, but Stewart and Bird missed the 2019 season with injuries.

“I’m excited. It’s a new place, new scenery,” said Holmes, who watched the draft at home. “They have a pretty good team. I’m really excited to see what the next step is for me.”

The 6-3 Holmes averaged 13.1 points and ranked seventh in the Big 12 in rebounds (8.7 per game) as a senior. Holmes works out on a regular basis with Atkins, her former UT teammate.

Joyner Holmes, formerly of Cedar Hill High School and the University of Texas, poses for a photograph outside her family's home after being drafted to the WNBA in the second round to the Seattle Storm on Friday, April 17, 2020, in Cedar Hill, Texas. (Ryan Michalesko / Staff Photographer)

+++

Subscribe now and get 1 month free with the code: GREGR

Sign up for our FREE HS newsletter

+++

Find more high school sports stories from The Dallas Morning News here.