Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison (Mitch) Mitchell McConnellMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse GOP Rep. French Hill named to coronavirus oversight committee MORE (R-Ky.) on Friday tapped Sens. Mike Crapo Michael (Mike) Dean CrapoMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package GOP senators urge Trump to protect insurers from state legislation Lobbying blitz yields wins for airlines, corporations, banks, unions MORE (R-Idaho) and Pat Toomey Patrick (Pat) Joseph ToomeyGOP senators push for quick, partial reopening of economy NSA improperly collected US phone records in October, new documents show Overnight Defense: Pick for South Korean envoy splits with Trump on nuclear threat | McCain blasts move to suspend Korean military exercises | White House defends Trump salute of North Korean general MORE (R-Pa.) to help conduct oversight on the recently-passed $2.2 trillion coronavirus relief package.

McConnell said in a statement that Crapo, the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee, will coordinate oversight into the CARES Act, which President Trump Donald John TrumpBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move Lady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package MORE signed into law last month. Toomey will be on the five-member congressional commission overseeing the Trump administration’s implementation of the legislation.

“The CARES Act is the biggest rescue package in the history of Congress,” said McConnell. “Appropriate, objective and nonpartisan oversight will be key to ensuring its dollars and programs find their mark.”

ADVERTISEMENT

McConnell added that he made the appointments after consulting with a slew of Senate committee chairs.

Toomey will serve on the so-called Congressional Oversight Commission, a key aspect of the coronavirus relief package that will oversee $500 billion being distributed by the Treasury Department.

“Senator Toomey is one of the sharpest members of the Senate,” McConnell said. “He is a leader on economics and finance and a key member of the Finance, Banking, and Budget Committees. The Commission will benefit greatly from his expertise.”

Republican and Democratic leaders in the House and Senate will each name one member of the panel, with the chair being selected in a joint decision by McConnell and Speaker Nancy Pelosi Nancy PelosiLady Gaga calls WHO chief a 'superstar' McCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Trump criticizes Pelosi over stalemate on small business loan funds MORE (D-Calif.).

Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer Charles (Chuck) Ellis SchumerMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Stacey Abrams throws support behind vote-by-mail efforts Former MSNBC host explains why UBI is a ventilator for U.S. economy in a crisis MORE (D-N.Y.) last week named Bharat Ramamurti, a former aide to Sen. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth WarrenBiden campaign seeks to let Sanders keep his delegates in unusual move McConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package Joe Biden's record on Social Security isn't perfect, but Donald Trump's is far worse MORE (D-Mass.), to the panel, and House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy Kevin Owen McCarthyMcCarthy says he supports incorporating hospital funding into small business aid package Freedom Caucus chair calls for GOP to reject additional funds for state, local governments Top Republican voices skepticism of rule change to allow remote voting MORE (R-Calif.) tapped Rep. French Hill James (French) French HillMcConnell rolls out GOP oversight efforts for coronavirus relief package GOP Rep. French Hill named to coronavirus oversight committee Pelosi to Democrats: 'Are you ready?' MORE (R-Ark.) to serve on the committee.

ADVERTISEMENT

Pelosi has yet to name her pick, and said Thursday that she is working with McConnell to work up a list of contenders for the committee’s chairmanship.

The House speaker has also indicted that she will establish a new select committee to conduct oversight of the CARES Act, though she has yet to name its members and would likely need a House vote to formally create the panel.

The Congressional Oversight Commission is one of three oversight mechanisms established in the relief package, though the other two measures have been thrust into controversy.

Trump has nominated an inspector general for pandemic response to oversee the same $500 billion as the congressional panel, though the pick, a White House lawyer, has faced backlash from Democrats who claim he cannot be impartial.

Trump also demoted the Pentagon watchdog who had been named to lead a panel of current inspectors general and no replacement has been announced.