Respiratory therapist Jessica Stingle was preparing to remove a breathing tube from a COVID-19 patient who had been breathing on his own for an entire day when, with no warning, things took a turn for the worse.

"He needed full support again," she said. "I didn't leave his room for over three hours because he was just doing so poorly. ... It's like you're going back all the way to the beginning."

This pattern seems to be happening on every one of her shifts taking care of COVID-19 patients so far.

Though the nurse specializes in lung diseases, she said COVID-19 patients seem to have much more erratic symptoms than she normally sees.

"They can just change so quickly with their requirements of oxygen needed and medication needed," she said. "You have to be on your toes the entire time."

How the new coronavirus damages lungs Many CT scan images of COVID-19 patients' lungs show patchy, irregular areas where the virus has damaged the lining of the lung. Amanda Morris and Alex Li, Arizona Republic

At Banner University Medical Center-Tucson, pulmonary and critical care doctor Christian Bime also said he has never seen anything like the new coronavirus before. As the medical director for the hospital's intensive care unit, Bime is used to treating the most critically ill patients suffering from severe pneumonia or patients with severe lung trauma, but he said treating COVID-19 is a unique challenge.

"When we stop supporting these patients, we find that it takes much longer to get them off of life support than it normally does for the other causes of lung injury," he said.

While many of the symptoms of COVID-19, such as a cough, fever or general tiredness, resemble other diseases such as the flu or bacterial pneumonia, the pattern of damage that the new coronavirus causes in the lungs seems to be very distinctive, according to Bime.

"If you look at the CAT scan, not all areas are affected in the same way," he said. "There's a pattern with COVID-19 that seems to be much more unique than the other pneumonias."

Dr. Christian Bime There's a pattern with COVID-19 that seems to be much more unique than the other pneumonias. Quote icon

CT scans of COVID-19 patients' lungs have a patchy appearance with areas of whitish-gray, the so-called "ground glass" appearance that was noted early on as a telltale sign of the disease.

"That's pretty much the main sign," Stingle said.

Clumps of these ground-glass patches seem to appear more on the outer edges and areas of the lungs so far, Bime said. Additionally, the spaces between air sacs appear to get thicker in COVID-19 patients, which he suspects is because of increased inflammation in the lining of the lung.

"This is typical, but there are cases that do not quite fit this pattern," Bime said. "It's too early to tell."

Show caption Hide caption CT scans of patients with COVID-19 reveal patchy white areas of the lung where the lung has been damaged by the virus. These patterns are... CT scans of patients with COVID-19 reveal patchy white areas of the lung where the lung has been damaged by the virus. These patterns are known as ground-glass opacities and indicate areas of inflammation, fluid buildup and tissue damage. Courtesy of the Radiological Society of North America

How the virus attacks the lungs

When the virus gets into a person's airway, it first attaches to the cells that form the lining of the lungs, called epithelial cells.

"The linings of the airway are designed such that things do not just move in and out of the tissues," Bime said. "It prevents the tissue that's below the airway from being exposed to the environment."

In addition to protecting the lungs much like skin protects inner organs and muscle, this lung lining also facilitates the exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen that is necessary in order to breathe.

Oxygen passes through this lining into the bloodstream to be carried throughout a person's body, and carbon dioxide passes through the lining from the blood in order to be expelled.

Currently, Bime thinks that the virus can attack and affect both the upper lung and the lower lung lining. Once,the new coronavirus gets inside a lung lining cell, it hijacks the cell and uses the cell as a factory to make more copies of itself. The new coronavirus keeps replicating itself inside the cell until the cell can no longer contain all the viruses, and the cell bursts open.

"So it bursts open and then you have more and more viruses that are produced to attack more and more cells," Bime said. "And so over a period of about an hour, one week, 10 days since you've had the first (virus) particle, you now have millions and millions of them."

When the lung lining is destroyed, it allows other bacteria or harmful particles to get into the lungs, Bime said, so patients often get co-infected with something else and need to be put on antibiotics as well.

This 3D model is based on the CT scan of a 68-year-old male COVID-19 patient. Courtesy of Dr. Terrence Lewis

Destroying cells that line the airways also causes inflammation and triggers an immune system response where blood cells get leakier, Bime said. Blood cells get leakier in response to an infection so that virus-fighting cells like white blood cells can travel into the infected area.

Normally, this is a good thing, but too much blood leaking into the airways of the lung can be fatal.

"Cells that normally stay within the blood vessels now go out into the lungs and sort of flood the areas that are normally occupied by air," Bime said. "So you basically flood the airways."

Because of this fluid, patients start having trouble breathing. Normally, over time, the lining cells should start to heal and absorb this fluid out of the airways and back into the blood vessels.

However, some patients seem to get stuck in the first stage of immune system response of inflammation and fluid build-up and do not switch into a second phase of immune response that allows them to defeat the virus and heal. For others, the first stage of immune response may be extremely severe, or the second stage of immune response may not kick in fast enough.

"The damage is happening very, very quickly," Bime said. "So we don't have the luxury of many, many hours or days before we have to support these patients."

Dr. Christian Bime The damage is happening very, very quickly. So we don't have the luxury of many, many hours or days before we have to support these patients. Quote icon

If the fluid build-up gets bad enough, patients will need to be put on life support. On life support, patients are sedated and a tube is put down their throat because they need to be given oxygen through a ventilator machine that attempts to force air into their lungs.

Every room that Stingle works in now has a ventilator in it. The Banner Boswell Medical Center-Sun City nurse has been exclusively caring for COVID-19 or COVID-19 suspected patients since she traveled to Greeley, Colorado, last week to work at Banner's North Colorado Medical Center, which was hit hard by the pandemic.

"We're hoping to pump the fluid out," she said.

But caring for patients on life support machines can be tricky, according to Bime.

"This machine is helpful, but it also has side effects that can damage the lungs," Bime said. "If you are not very careful with a life support machine, you could actually injure the lungs."

The amount of oxygen and pressure needed is different for every patient, according to Stingle, and can be influenced by underlying health conditions that a patient may have.

"So you're going back and forth trying to figure out where the happy medium is between everything," she said.

Doctors may attempt to help COVID-19 patients by having them lie on their stomachs. Lying on the back, fluid in the lungs pools, and some areas become completely filled with fluid.

"If you flip somebody, then you improve the areas that are opening up," Bime said. Patients also can cough some of the fluid out of their lungs.

Normally, patients are only put into prone position when they become very sick, but Bime said that now, health care professionals across the country are talking about doing it more and more.

"In these COVID-19 patients, we are finding out that doing it a lot earlier might be beneficial," he said.

At North Colorado Medical Center, Stingle said the new protocol is that all patients who meet a certain threshold are rotated into a prone position.

It's only been a few weeks since Bime started caring for COVID-19 patients, but he is more worried about the challenges yet to come.

"We're in a holding pattern," he said. "What if all of a sudden, so many people show up and we don't have the ability to take care of all those people? I think that is what scares us the most."

Stingle is scheduled to return to Arizona in late April. She's still figuring out how to manage care for her COVID-19 patients but said that her goal in the coming months is to get as many of her patients discharged as possible.

"I just take it one day at a time and one patient at a time," she said.

Amanda Morris covers all things bioscience, which includes health care, technology, new research and the environment. Send her tips, story ideas, or dog memes at amorris@gannett.com and follow her on Twitter @amandamomorris for the latest bioscience updates.

Independent coverage of bioscience in Arizona is supported by a grant from the Flinn Foundation.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.