"Selma" director Ava DuVernay has produced a two-part documentary featuring women of color in politics that is set to premiere in June, PBS announced Thursday.

“And She Could Be Next” was acquired by POV and will air as a two-night special as part of PBS’s summer-long “Trailblazers” program celebrating transformative women.

“If ever there was a moment where we need to be reminded of the leadership of women of color, that time is now,” DuVernay said in the announcement. “If you’re an immigrant, a young person, a person of faith, or simply someone who has felt unseen for too long, you will find yourself reflected in this story.”

ADVERTISEMENT

News of the documentary was first reported by Deadline.

The documentary series was filmed from 2018 through 2019 and follows candidates and organizers across the country.

The episodes will center on Stacey Abrams, a former Georgia House speaker and gubernatorial candidate; Bushra Amiwala, a school board member and the youngest Muslim elected official in the U.S.; California state Sen. Maria Elana Durazo (D); Rep. Veronica Escobar Veronica EscobarAva DuVernay-produced documentary highlighting rising female politicians of color to air in June The Hill's Coronavirus Report: Rep. Debbie Dingell's diamond analogy; Cuomo says Trump isn't a king Texas House Dems ask governor to issue stay-at-home order MORE (D-Texas); Rep. Lucy McBath Lucia (Lucy) Kay McBathThe Hill's Campaign Report: 200 days to Election Day 2020 Ava DuVernay-produced documentary highlighting rising female politicians of color to air in June Here's where things stand 200 days before Election Day MORE (D-Va.); Rep. Rashida Tlaib Rashida Harbi TlaibAva DuVernay-produced documentary highlighting rising female politicians of color to air in June Harris, Ocasio-Cortez among Democrats calling for recurring direct payments in fourth coronavirus bill Ilhan Omar edits headline of New York Post article slamming the Squad: 'There, fixed it for you' MORE (D-Mich.) and Nse Ufot, the executive director of the New Georgia project.

The first episode was an official selection of the 2020 Tribeca Film Festival, which has been postponed due to the coronavirus pandemic.

The docuseries is directed by Peabody Award-winner Grace Lee and Iranian documentary filmmaker Marjan Safinia.

It is the first miniseries to be co-produced by POV.