We know there’s a lot of information out there, so we gathered our top coronavirus coverage for you. The resources below will help you navigate how to get help if you live in the D-FW are and you’ve been affected by COVID-19.

This story has been updated as new information becomes available.

Donations, shelters, and fundraisers

The closing of businesses has put a financial and operational strain on hundreds of thousands of North Texans. Here are some organizations and fundraisers providing help or in need of donations or volunteers to support people in crisis during the COVID-19 pandemic.

DART

Dallas Area Rapid Transit drivers will pick up and deliver groceries to paratransit customers.

The service is free, and DART drivers will handle pickup and delivery. Paratransit riders must place their orders directly with the grocery store and provide DART with pickup ID information. Customers interested in signing up for the grocery delivery service can call 214-828-8588 from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Monday through Friday for more information.

North Texas Food Bank

The North Texas Food Bank mobile pantry is operating at Fair Park, and other locations, to distribute free food to those in need.

Meal pickups will be available only to people with vehicles to comply with social-distancing requirements. People without cars can use the “Find Food” tool on ntfb.org to find additional resources.

Minnie’s Food Pantry

Minnie’s Food Pantry in Plano is expanding its service days to meet demand by those who are experiencing food insecurity due to business or school closures from the coronavirus outbreak.

The pantry’s new days of operation are Monday through Saturday, up from its previous four days of service. Hours will be from 8:30 to 11:30 a.m. Here’s how to donate so they can continue providing food.

Dallas ISD

The district’s food service department will distribute five days of free food at once to families and students as part of its grab-and-go program, moving away from its model of giving two or three days of meals twice a week. Meals can be picked up every Thursday from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. at one of 47 locations.

Shelters available

While space is limited, there are shelters providing beds while shelter-in-place orders are enacted. To keep the homeless population safe, service providers have had to eliminate beds in shelters to maintain a 6-foot distance between cots.

For North Texas immigrants

Left out of government aid programs, unauthorized workers are getting help during the coronavirus pandemic from grassroots groups. Here are some resources for workers and their families.

For artists

For D-FW artists seeking financial relief, a national fund is offering millions for those who can prove financial need. The money will be paid to artists via “unrestricted $5,000 grants.” Those interested can apply and make donations at artistrelief.org.

Government assistance

The U.S. and Texas governments are providing economic relief to as many people as possible. For information on the U.S. government’s response to COVID-19, click here.

Stimulus checks

The Senate unanimously approved a $2 trillion package aimed at blunting the economic devastation of the COVID-19 pandemic. The deal includes direct payments to many American families, along with money for hospitals and states, low-cost loans to small businesses and a torrent of cash and loans to airlines.

To check the status of your payment, go to irs.gov/coronavirus/economic-impact-payments.

Small business loans

Gov. Greg Abbott announced that $50 million of private, forgivable loans will be made to Texas small businesses struggling because of the coronavirus epidemic. Small business owners may find out more on the website of LiftFund.

What to do if you’re faced with unemployment

Texans applying for benefits are encouraged to call the Texas Workforce Commission’s toll-free number at 1-800-939-6631 or apply online. Call centers are open Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. and from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. on weekends.

If you are dealing with mental health during this time

On March 31, the Texas Department of Health and Human Services launched a hotline specifically for those struggling with depression or similar concerns related to the pandemic.

The phone number for the state health department “COVID-19 mental health support line,” which is staffed around the clock, is 833-986-1919. The hotline connects callers to counseling services that are confidential and free of charge, according to the department.

Additional resources can be found at the state mental health and substance abuse website.

Filing a police report

The Dallas Police Department is asking residents to file some police reports online to limit face-to-face interaction between officers and the public. Residents can fill out a report at dallaspolice.net. Click “File a Police Report Online.”

The types of incidents to be reported online are car accidents, burglary of a coin machine, burglary of a motor vehicle, credit/debit card abuse, criminal mischief (damage under $2,500), graffiti (damage under $2,500), harassing phone calls, identity theft, lost property, reckless damage, theft (under $2,500), theft of service (under $2,500) and shoplifting (under $2,500).

Where the virus is spreading in Texas and how to get tested

We built a map of new cases, updated daily so you can see Texas cases, county by county. The figures are gathered from the Texas Department of State Health Services.

Symptoms of COVID-19

Common symptoms include fever, dry cough and fatigue. Shortness of breath, chills and body aches are associated with more dangerous cases of coronavirus, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Find answers to key questions here.

Getting tested

If you are starting to show symptoms of COVID-19, it’s important to know where you can get tested. Dallas County has set up sites that can provide tests.

What to do if you have it

There is still no vaccine or specific treatment for the new disease. The advice is the same for people who test positive for COVID-19 as it is for those who are showing symptoms of the virus: Stay home until you’re no longer at risk of spreading it to others. If your symptoms are severe you should seek medical attention.

Paying COVID-19 related medical costs

Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas, the state’s largest health insurer, is waiving out-of-pocket costs for COVID-19 treatment for its 6 million members. This will include treatment received from April 1 to May 31 at in-network facilities or for out-of-network emergencies. Cigna, Humana and UnitedHealth Group have also waived cost-sharing for their customers.

Answers to your biggest questions

What’s closed, what’s open?

Schools, colleges, entertainment and athletic events have all been put on pause. Here’s a list of coronavirus-related closures in the D-FW area.

Dining out, but eating in

As people hunker down at home, restaurants have quickly adapted to the drive-thru, delivery and to-go options as dining rooms are forced to close.

Restaurants (and grocery stores and farmers markets and liquor stores) are deemed “essential,” which means they can continue to offer takeout, delivery and to-go. Here are 200-plus D-FW restaurants offering drive-thru, delivery and to-go options.

Canceled events

The show can’t always go on, especially during a global pandemic. The list of canceled or postponed events continues to grow daily as new regulations limit the number of people allowed at gatherings to 10 people or less.

The sports world has also been impacted. First came the NBA, then NHL, then pretty much every other sport. It’s looking like we won’t get to watch our favorite teams play for a while. Stay up to date on sports changes here. Already had tickets? If you want to know how refunds for Dallas-area sports will be issued, click here.

In your neck of the woods

We’re also providing updated coverage in some of the major cities around Dallas Fort-Worth. Follow along to see new cases, plus what’s closed or canceled in your area.

Looking for more coverage? Read the latest on how the virus is affecting North Texas and beyond. Your support means everything to us. Sign up for our coronavirus newsletter for daily updates or consider becoming a subscriber.

Do you have a story to share of your own or know someone who is modeling resilience and optimism during the coronavirus outbreak? We’d love to hear from you. Please fill out the form here so that The Dallas Morning News staff may follow up.

Did we miss anything important? Let us know at audience@dallasnews.com.