CLOSE

Donna Reiner (third from left) with her family. (Photo: Donna Reiner/Special for The Republic)

Someday our younger family members may ask what was it like during the COVID-19 pandemic. And the stories will begin by describing social distancing, chatting on Zoom, cooking, reading, doing school online and working from home. Some of these things may create puzzled looks.

And some of us were quarantined many years ago.

It was the summer of 1951. I was 4 and my sister Ruth was just 8. I suspect that it was a rather “normal,” carefree summer of playing outdoors, listening to the radio and looking at books (we had no TV). Father went off to work and mother took care of the three of us. (We have a younger sister who was 2 at the time.)

And then … thanks to the “generosity” of our next-door neighbor and babysitter, my sisters and I were exposed to the measles. Like COVID-19, measles is caused by a virus and transmitted in a similar fashion. But for some reason, my older sister and I came down with it about the same time while my younger sister did not. So, what was the big deal?

MORE THINGS TO DO: For restaurant reviews, travel tips, concert picks and more, subscribe to azcentral.com.

I have no recollection that our mother was pregnant that summer. Ruth knew she was going to have a baby, so it wasn't a surprise when she went to the hospital. I don’t even remember her “disappearing,” but she was certainly gone.

Both of us were quite sick, running high temperatures. The light hurt our eyes, so the whole house was kept dark, which must have been difficult since it was July. Dad went to work every day and a couple took care of us. They must have cooked, did laundry and cleaned the house since dad wouldn't know how to do those things.

Donna Reiner (Photo: Donna Reiner/Special for The Republic)

Besides keeping up the house, this couple entertained us too, keeping our youngest sister away from the “contagion” room. I distinctly remember cutting out the Sunday funnies and putting them in a scrapbook. That kept me occupied for hours, or so I remember.

We would get special treats like ice pops or ice cream, which was quite delightful as I’m not sure mother would have done that. We probably didn't stay inside for a long period once we felt better, but to a 4-year-old, being cooped up inside for any length of time seemed like an eternity.

Mom had to stay in the hospital a long time to protect the baby. When she did come home, we couldn't touch her (yes, it was another girl).

That's when Ruth and I decided to name her. I wanted to call her "Ancy." Ruth thought that was okay, since she wanted to call her Nancy Ann after her storybook dolls. Fortunately, our parents approved, and that's what she's been called ever since.

Donna Reiner (left) with her family. (Photo: Donna Reiner/Special for The Republic)

The memories of a 4-year-old are often selective and in this case, mine are totally related to that period of quarantine with a little bit of help from my older sister.

Donna Reiner is the co-author of three books on Phoenix history.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/phoenix-history/2020/04/16/recalling-measles-outbreaks-and-quarantines-1950-s/2991306001/