UPDATED: 5:35 a.m. EDT, Oct. 23 —

Remains of a toddler found Tuesday in Alabama were believed to be a missing three-year-old girl, according to new reports. Police said they believe they have found Kamille “Cupcake” McKinney, who went missing more than a week ago in Birmingham, AL.com reported.

Her body was found by police and the FBI in a dumpster at a landfill.

Mayor Randall Woodfin asked Birmingham and its residents for “solidarity” in a series of tweets he posted Tuesday night.

But tonight, right now, at this moment, I ask one thing of this community. Not to take sides. Not to finger-point. I ask every member of the 99 neighborhoods that makes up our city to stand in solidarity beside this broken family. Now, more than ever, this family needs us. — Randall Woodfin (@randallwoodfin) October 23, 2019

“This is a tough moment for this city. This is a tough moment for this family,” Woodfin said.

Two people who were already in police custody on separate charges were expected to be charged with Cupcake’s murder and kidnapping. There were no reports of what motives that the suspects, Patrick Stallworth, 39, and 29-year-old Derick Irisha Brown, could have had for allegedly kidnapping and killing the young girl. The couple has maintained their innocence.

Police held a press conference on Tuesday night to make the announcements.

“I wish I had all of you gathered here with good news. I wish I could share a high five or some other type of celebratory salutation but I cannot,” Birmingham Police Chief Patrick Smith said before adding that his officers and FBI agents had been going through 12 tons of trash from the Birmingham area for days.

Alabama’s governor tweeted her condolences Tuesday night after learning of the heartbreaking news.

The heart of our state is broken, but our resolve must be to do everything we can to avoid this tragedy from happening to another family. Our prayers are with Kamille’s family and all who have been touched by this nightmare. — Governor Kay Ivey (@GovernorKayIvey) October 23, 2019

Cupcake was abducted on the evening of Oct. 12 while she was with her mother and other family members at a birthday party. She was last seen in the parking lot of the Tom Brown Village public housing community with other children who reported that a Black male got out of an SUV and put Cupcake in the vehicle. Police found out that the SUV in question turned out to be a Toyota Sequoia per surveillance footage from a nearby Shell gas station that also showed images of a possible suspect. Police quickly ruled out the possibility that Cupcake’s disappearance had anything to do with a custody dispute.

The Alabama Law Enforcement Agency issued an Amber Alert for Cupcake hours later and on Oct. 13 the FBI announced that it would also get involved in the search.

If you just got another #AmberAlert on your phone and still haven’t been able to put a face to it, here’s 3 year-old Kamille McKinney. Her dad provided these pictures and is begging and pleading that someone come forward to Birmingham Police with any information. @abc3340 pic.twitter.com/DiEPF1mBqc — Ashley Gooden (@AshleyGoodenTV) October 14, 2019

Cupcake’s father, Dominic McKinney, gave perspective on the little girl whose disappearance has saddened countless people and inspired many others to aid in the search for her.

“She’s a good girl,” he said. “She’s sweet, she’s really loveable. Everyone loves Cupcake.”

April Thomas, Cupcake’s mother, also urged the community to call the toddler by her nickname if they think they have spotted her.

“If anybody sees Cupcake, just call her by her name,” Thomas tearfully said. “Don’t call her Kamille. She understands Cupcake.”

The National Center for Missing & Exploited Children (NCMEC) also announced that it would be assisting with trying to locate Cupcake. Though NCMEC Vice President Robert Lowery said that it is very rare these days for children to be abducted by strangers, he urged the community not to fear the worst.

“We’re not going to give up the search or give up hope to find Kamille alive and return her home to her family because that would be a great disservice,” Lowery said. “I think often time yes, time is the enemy when children are missing and we hope to find them and get them returned.”

He said it would take a group effort to find Cupcake as quickly as possible.

“The longer they’re away, the more likely they’re to be victimized, but that doesn’t mean we’re not going to find her and return her,” Lowery added. “We need to fully engage in reporting tips information.”

Authorities announced on Oct. 14 that they had located the vehicle in question and detained Stallworth and Brown. Stallworth was charged with four counts of possession of child pornography and three counts of possession with child pornography with intent to distribute. Brown was charged with kidnapping for a separate incident. At the time, both were also questioned about Cupcake’s disappearance.

One local attorney offered an unusual reward for Cupcake’s safe return.

“You bring me this child, pay me a dollar, I’m your lawyer at that point,” Eric Guster said in a Facebook Live video recorded Oct. 15. “I can’t tell people who you are. Let me tell you why this is important for you. Number one, it’ll get the heat off of you. The major heat will be off of you because the child will be returned. Secondly, I think it got out of hand. Something y’all were doing got out of hand. Don’t hurt that baby, no matter what.”

Police expanded the search for Cupcake across state lines and her father has been helping law enforcement. He pleaded for his daughter’s safe return.

“Drop her off anywhere,” Dominic said. “Just let her out. Somebody will see her. Everybody knows what’s going on. Just take her to the store and let her out somebody is going to see her. They know what’s going on and that will be the end of this. We just want the baby back.”

Cupcake’s abduction was the latest in a disturbing trend of Black children becoming victims of violent crimes. It was only in May when four-year-old Maleah Davis went missing in Houston, making her at least the eighth such victim since March. It would appear that Cupcake is the ninth.

SEE ALSO:

‘It’s Above Me Now’: Hotel Clerk’s Video With Racist Guest Goes Viral

‘Who Said I Can’t Say Ni**a?’: Blackface Video Of High School Student Sparks Outrage

Meet Jogger Joe, The Man Who Took Racist Cue From BBQ Becky In Tossing Homeless Man’s Clothes