President Trump was challenged at Monday's coronavirus press briefing for the way his administration has responded to the coronavirus crisis. CBS News White House correspondent Paula Reid pressed Trump for playing a video during the briefing criticizing the media for their reaction while praising his own handling of the crisis. The president admonished Reid a "disgrace" and a "fake" and said the media has a low "approval rating."



"What did you do with the time that you bought?" Reid asked. "The video has a complete gap the month of February."



"Are these rants supposed to make people feel confident?" Reid later asked.



"Look, look, you know you're a fake. You know that. Your whole network, the way you cover it is fake. And most of you--and not all of you, but the people are wise to you. That's why you have a lower--a lower approval rating than you ever had before times probably three," Trump said.





PAULA REID, CBS NEWS: Your--your ban bought you some time--



PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP: --But he did say--he did call me--



QUESTION: --What did you do in that time--



TRUMP: --Xenophobic. Wait a minute. He called me xenophobic. He called me a racist, because he has since apologized and he said I did the right thing. So, when you say why didn't you this, every Democrat thought I made a mistake when I did it. I saved tens of thousands, maybe hundreds of thousands of lives by putting in--



QUESTION: --Well, what did you do with that time that you bought? The argument is that you bought yourself some time and you didn't use it to prepare hospitals. You didn't use it to ramp up testing.



TRUMP: You're so--you're so--



QUESTION: --But now nearly 20 million people are--



TRUMP: --You're so disgraceful--



QUESTION: --Unemployed. Tens of thousands--



TRUMP: --It's so disgraceful the way you say that. Let me just--



QUESTION: --Of Americans are dead--



TRUMP: --Listen, I just went over it--



QUESTION: --How is this (INAUDIBLE) real or this rant supposed to make people feel confident--



TRUMP: --I just went over it--



QUESTION: --In an unprecedented crisis?



TRUMP: Nobody thought we should do it. And when I did it--



QUESTION: --Well, what did you do with the time that you bought?



TRUMP: You know what we did?



QUESTION: The month of February. That--that video was a gap--



TRUMP: --You know what we did? What do you do--



QUESTION: --The entire month of February.



TRUMP: What you do when you have no case in the whole United States?



QUESTION: You had cases in February.



TRUMP: When you--you--excuse me. You reported it. Zero cases, zero deaths on January 17th.



QUESTION: In January, February, the entire month of February.



TRUMP: I said in January.



QUESTION: The video has a complete gap the month of February.



TRUMP: On January 30--



QUESTION: --What did your administration due in February with the time that your travel ban bought you?



TRUMP: A lot.



QUESTION: What?



TRUMP: A lot. And in fact, will give you a list what we did. In fact, part of it was up there. We did a lot.



QUESTION: It wasn't up there. The video had a gap.



TRUMP: Look, look, you know you're a fake. You know that. Your whole network, the way you cover it is fake. And most of you--and not all of you, but the people are wise to you. That's why you have a lower--a lower approval rating than you ever had before times probably three.



QUESTION: 20 million people are now unemployed.



TRUMP: And when you ask me that question--



QUESTION: --Tens of thousands are dead, Mr. President--



TRUMP: --Let me ask you this. Why didn't Biden--why didn't--why did Biden apologize? Why did he write a letter--



QUESTION: --(INAUDIBLE) people right now care about why Joe Biden--



TRUMP: --No, that's very important--



QUESTION: --Didn't apologize to you, sir.



TRUMP: Why did the Democrats think that I acted too quickly? You know why? Because they really thought that I acted too quickly. We have done a great job--



QUESTION: --So, you definitely (INAUDIBLE)--



TRUMP: --Now, I could have I could've kept it open and I could have done what some countries are doing it. They're getting beat up pretty badly. I could've kept it open. I thought of keeping it open because nobody's ever heard of closing down a country, let alone the United States of America. But if I would've done that, we would have had hundreds of thousands of people that would right now be dead.

We've done this right, and we--we really--we really have done this right. The problem is the press doesn't cover it the way it should be. Go ahead, one more question. Steve, go ahead.

