During CNN’s televised town-hall event with Senator Bernie Sanders on Monday night, a Howard University student named Osara Grayson stood up to ask the newly announced Democratic Presidential candidate a question. “In a political climate where we see the current President and his followers using terms such as ‘fake news’ or ‘alternative facts,’ ” Grayson said, reading from a notecard, “how do you plan to have a productive discussion with someone who is unwilling to accept facts?”

Sanders, standing on the stage, nodded. He first addressed Trump’s attacks on the media. “Understand what that means,” he said. “This is an attack on the very fundamentals of American democracy.” Then he turned to how he will approach the campaign. The discussion wouldn’t be with Trump, he said, but with his supporters. “I go not only into communities which are progressive or Democratic—we head out to Trump country,” he said. “And we are going to talk to those people, and we are going to expose Trump as the liar and fraud that he is. Trump told working people that he was going to be on their side. He is not on their side.” By the end of the campaign, Sanders said, “I suspect that a number of people who voted for Donald Trump will understand that he is not their friend.”

CNN’s Wolf Blitzer, who served as moderator, pressed Sanders on a more specific point. If he were on a debate stage with Trump, Blitzer asked, how would Sanders “engage” with him? Sanders, so often deadly serious during campaign events, offered a joke: “We’ll bring a lie detector along, and every time he lies it goes beep.” Then Sanders, with his usual constancy, returned to his earlier point. “I have conservative friends; we all do,” Sanders said. “And they’re honest people. They believe what they believe, I believe what I believe. And that’s called democracy, that’s a good thing. But I think the fraud that Trump is, the pathological liar that he is, has to be exposed.”

Democrats who have put themselves forward as Presidential candidates have resisted framing the 2020 election as simply a referendum on Trump. Elizabeth Warren has described the President as “just the latest and most extreme symptom of what has gone wrong in America.” Cory Booker has said he is “going to run a race about not who I’m against or what I’m against but who I’m for and what I’m for.” Kamala Harris prefers talking about restoring “truth” and “justice” to calling Trump out by name on the stump. Sanders has his own broad progressive agenda. But on Monday, pushed to offer his plans to confront Trump, he drew a bright line between Trump and the voters who made him President. The path to a post-Trump country, Sanders said, runs through Trump country.