CLOSE

U.S. District Court Judge Dominic Lanza said the Arizona Constitution requires initiative campaigns to collect signatures from supporters in person. (Photo: Charlie Leight/The Republic)

A federal judge rejected a request by two ballot measure campaigns to collect petition signatures from voters online as an alternative to dispatching volunteers with clipboards during a pandemic.

Arguing that public health precautions have curtailed their efforts to earn spots on the ballot in November, the campaigns filed suit earlier this month, asking a judge to order the Arizona government to let them use the same website that candidates for state office use to collect signatures from voters.

Secretary of State Katie Hobbs supported the proposal and said her office could make changes necessary to the website, known as E-Qual, to accommodate the initiatives.

But U.S. District Court Judge Dominic Lanza said the Arizona Constitution requires initiative campaigns to collect signatures from supporters in person.

"Although the public has a strong interest in enacting laws through the initiative process, and although the court is loathe to take any action (or inaction) that would expose Arizonans to an increased risk of harm during these challenging times, the signature requirements (the lawsuit) seeks to displace have been a part of Arizona's constitutional and electoral landscape for over a century," he wrote in a 30-page order.

Follow Arizona politics? Our reporters stay on top of it all. Subscribe now to azcentral.com.

Policymakers, or voters using the initiative process, should change the law, not a judge in a sudden and unusual lawsuit, he added.

The state Supreme Court may still weigh in on the issue in a similar lawsuit filed by other ballot measure campaigns.

Lanza's ruling, however, is a setback for groups arguing the coronavirus pandemic and the social distancing measures that have come along with it will undercut the state's process of direct democracy.

Some groups have enough signatures

Several proposed ballot measures could have big ramifications on everything from drug policy to education funding.

One campaign behind the case in state court is aiming to get a question on the ballot legalizing the use of recreational marijuana. That campaign has indicated in court filings it already has enough signatures to get on the ballot.

But another campaign behind the lawsuit in federal court, Arizonans for Fair Elections, indicated it has far fewer than the roughly 237,000 signatures needed by July to qualify for the ballot. Their measure proposes automatic voter registration and tougher lobbying laws.

Lanza said he could not fault campaigns that did not plan on a pandemic disrupting just about everything in day-to-day life, but agreed with lawyers from the Attorney General's Office that some should have started gathering signatures earlier.

"We are very disappointed to see the court's decision today," said Rodd McLeod, a spokesman for the group Arizonans Fed Up with Failing Healthcare, which was part of the federal court case and is backing a ballot measure on medical billing and pay for health care workers.

"During this unprecedented health crisis, we're simply asserting that Arizona voters should not have to choose between their health and their basic First Amendment rights. If the E-Qual system is good enough for politicians, then it is good enough for the people."

McLeod said Friday the group was assessing its options for refiling its case or appealing to a higher court.

Attorney General Mark Brnovich welcomed Lanza's decision, arguing it is up to policymakers, not courts to decide whether initiative campaigns should be allowed to collect petition signatures online.

"We all share a common concern for public safety during this pandemic, but you can't use a health crisis to disregard our state Constitution," he said.

Contact Andrew Oxford at andrew.oxford@arizonarepublic.com or on Twitter at @andrewboxford.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/politics/arizona/2020/04/17/judge-arizona-ballot-measure-backers-must-collect-signatures-person/5157830002/