News of the Day From Across the Nation, March 24

Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close News of the Day From Across the Nation, March 24 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

1 Cohen rebuffed: A former personal lawyer for President Trump was denied early release from a three-year prison sentence Tuesday after he pleaded guilty to numerous charges, including campaign finance fraud and lying to Congress. U.S. District Judge William H. Pauley III said it seemed Michael Cohen’s request for release to home confinement after serving 10 months in prison “appears to be just another effort to inject himself into the news cycle.” The judge noted that Cohen raised the danger of getting the coronavirus in prison as the latest reason why he believed he was entitled to a reduced sentence.

2 Deputies cleared: Three South Carolina sheriff’s deputies won’t face any criminal charges after they fatally shot a man during a domestic dispute, authorities said. The State Law Enforcement Division said they found no evidence of wrongdoing on the part of Georgetown County Deputies Drew Wynans, William McWethy and Jerome Maybank in the fatal shooting of Kreed Bateman, 31. Deputies responded to a domestic disturbance call on Dec. 10 at Bateman’s home just outside of Andrews, authorities said. Deputy Solicitor Alicia Richardson said deputies had probable cause to arrest Bateman for second-degree domestic violence for assaulting the mother of his children in their presence. She said evidence verified that Bateman shot at deputies first.

3 Mother guilty: A woman from Chicago has been sentenced to up to 50 years in prison on charges stemming from the beating death of her 5-year-old son in Iowa. Jacqueline Rambert, 26, was sentenced Friday in Davenport, court records said. She pleaded guilty to child endangerment resulting in death and child endangerment-multiple acts. Rambert testified against her co-defendant and former boyfriend, Tre Henderson. He was convicted Feb. 13 of first-degree murder and other crimes.

4 Scam suspects: A group of North Carolina counterfeiters has been accused of impersonating Walmart corporate executives and scamming multiple stores in several states out of about $900,000, court documents said. Court documents said counterfeiters presented themselves as Walmart executives and persuaded inexperienced cashiers to cash fake checks with routing numbers tied to banks, including of Bank of America and PNC Bank. The counterfeiting ring hit 300 Walmart stores in 30 states, defrauding the company out of almost $900,000. The counterfeiters would use the checks to purchase prepaid Walmart debit cards, then use the cards to buy merchandise they would later return for cash, documents said.

5 ATM thefts: Two men are facing federal charges in Florida for using small explosions to rob ATMs in the Tampa Bay area. The U.S. Attorney’s Office in Tampa has charged Mawdo Malick Sallah, 33, of Clearwater, Fla., and Kirk Douglas Johnson, 34, of Anderson, S.C., with conspiring to commit arson. They each face up to 20 years in prison. Sallah and Johnson took nearly $70,000 from several Florida ATMs between November and January and vandalized others without taking any cash, according to a criminal complaint released Monday.

Chronicle News Services