Editor’s note: This is an archive of live coronavirus news updates.

Breaking news developments on March 22:

11:25 p.m. Lake County closing public waterways on Monday: Citing “significant recreational activity that increases the risk of transmission,” the public health officer of Lake County issued a release Sunday evening that Clear Lake and other popular destinations in the county will be closed to the public as of Monday morning. This decision, similar to the closings imposed Sunday in Marin County, will also apply to motels, RV parks and campgrounds in Lake County.

10:32 p.m. Social-distance cycling OK during coronavirus pandemic: Finally, some good news from City Hall. Social-distance bicycle riding is OK. It’s just as OK as solo walking, hiking or jogging. At first, City Hall listed cycling among the banned nonessential forms of travel, even though exercise is encouraged. Fortunately, after thinking it over, City Hall realized that cycling involves exercise. Go ahead and bike ride, said the authorities, just don’t congregate. The Chronicle’s Steve Rubenstein offers some cycling suggestions for the Bay Area.

10:05 p.m. San Francisco sheriff’s deputy tests positive for coronavirus: A San Francisco Sheriff’s Deputy assigned to the county jail at the Hall of Justice has tested positive for coronavirus, the Sheriff’s Office reported. The deputy tested positive at a health facility outside of San Francisco, according to a release. There have been no confirmed cases reported among the county’s incarcerated population. “While we are saddened that one of our colleagues has tested positive, we are also well prepared to take the next steps to prevent further exposure to our staff and the incarcerated,” Sheriff Paul Miyamoto said in the release. “We’re working to reassure the loved ones of those in our custody and care that they are safe while giving our staff the tools and support they need to feel protected.”

9:55 p.m. Sonoma County reports first recovery, 25 active cases: Officials in Sonoma County have reported the first case of a COVID-19 patient recovering, according to the county’s case tracker. Sonoma County also reported two new cases Sunday, increasing its total active cases to 25. The county reported its first death from the novel coronavirus on Friday.

9:50 p.m. Sonoma County seeks donations of health safety gear: Concerned that the anticipating growth of COVID-19 cases will deplete the county’s stock of personal protective supplies, Sonoma County has put out a call for public donations of items including unused N-95 masks, protective gowns, nitrile gloves and goggles. “We are facing an unprecedented public health emergency,” said Susan Gorin, chair of Sonoma County’s Board of Supervisors. “Protecting and supporting the needs of our first responders and health care workers is critical to safeguarding the health of our community during this crisis.” Donations from individuals should go the Salvation Army, according to a statement released Sunday by the Sonoma County Administrator’s Office.

9:47 p.m. Bay Area residents filling little libraries with food, toilet paper: Little Free Libraries in the Bay Area, once a charming home for dog-eared Tom Clancy novels or an extra copy of “Goodnight Moon,” are turning into coronavirus supply stations — filling with food, soap and rolls of that most sought-after item: toilet paper. Read more of Peter Hartlaub’s story here.

9:20 p.m. No vote Sunday for federal rescue package: Saturday’s optimism that we’d see a bipartisan economic rescue package in place this weekend broke down on Sunday into an acrimonious round of finger-pointing between the two Congressional parties. At stake is a package that reportedly could reach $2 billion — larger than the 2008 bank bailout and 2009 recovery act combined. Read more on this report here.

9:15 p.m. California prison inmate tests positive for coronavirus: An inmate at the California State Prison, Los Angeles County has tested positive for COVID-19, California Department of Corrections officials reported. It marks the first confirmed case of an inmate in the California state prison system. The patient, who has been in isolation since March 19 and was tested on March 20, is in stable condition and being treated on-site, according to the CDCR. Officials are restricting movement at the prison while investigating others who may have had contact with the inmate and will quarantine those deemed at-risk for observation.

8:49 p.m. Sheltering-in-place social live wires keep calendars packed via live stream: Nearly overnight, the novel coronavirus has transformed everything about the way people in the Bay Area are supposed to interact. Almost as quickly, those living under stay-at-home orders here and beyond have found new ways to provide some semblance of normalcy. There may be limited physical contact, but there’s a lot of online living going on. Read more in Ryan Kost’s story here.

8:03 p.m. Port of Oakland longshoremen threaten to walk off job due to virus concerns: Some dockworkers at the Port of Oakland are threatening to refuse work at a terminal that they say isn’t properly sanitizing equipment and facilities for employees. The move could halt logistics operations and further strain the global supply chain amid the coronavirus outbreak. Bay Area representatives of the International Longshore & Warehouse Union, Locals 10, 34, 75 and 91, are asking SSA Marine to thoroughly clean equipment at its Oakland terminal between shifts. Read Shwanika Narayan’s full report here.

7:24 p.m. Long lines at Bay Area grocery stores: Marina Supermarket on Chestnut Street in San Francisco is one of those crammed city stores with aisles one cart wide and two check stands working with a third in reserve. But on Sunday, all three checkers were buzzing to keep a line of carts and baskets from backing all the way up the center aisle to the ice cream freezer, as it had done earlier in the week. “It’s a little busy now,” said manager Gareth Yep before upgrading his head count to “really slammed,” and then “crazy,” in the course of one phone call. Read Sam Whiting’s full story here.

7:05 p.m. Canada won’t send athletes if Olympics are held in 2020: Canada’s Olympic and Paralympic Committees announced they will not send teams if the Games are held this summer due to COVID-19 risks. In a statement, Team Canada called for the Games to be postponed until 2021. “This is not solely about athlete health — it is about public health,” the statement read. Others have called for the Games to be postponed to next summer. The International Olympic Committee reportedly has given itself until mid-April to consider postponement and said in a statement earlier Sunday that “cancellation is not on the agenda.”

6:50 p.m. Bed Bath & Beyond closing all stores: Retailer Bed Bath & Beyond announced it will temporarily close all locations starting Monday until April 3. In a statement released Sunday, the retailer said it will be “providing applicable pay and benefits” to employees during the shutdown. The company’s website will remain open for online sales. It also said returns by customers will be accepted for up to 240 days from date of purchase.

6:22 p.m. Trump approves federal aid for California: A new wave of federal assistance to battle the coronavirus is headed to California after Gov. Gavin Newsom requested — and President Trump approved — a “Major Disaster Declaration” for the state. The declaration clears the way for individual assistance programs to assist those affected by the outbreak, including medical care, emergency aid, unemployment assistance, legal services and supplemental nutrition assistance.” Read The Chronicle’s report here.

6:15 p.m. Coronavirus halts California ballot measure signature gathering: Gov. Gavin Newsom’s stay-at-home order will not only keep people off the streets, but also could keep some initiative measures off the November ballot. With the statewide ban on nearly all public contact, signature gatherers who normally set up their tables at supermarkets, on street corners and at crowded public events will find themselves out of business. And without the signatures, supporters of a variety of ballot measures could find themselves short of qualifying. Measures that don’t make the upcoming ballot can’t go before the public until November 2022. Read John Wildermuth’s story here.

5:50 p.m. Napa County reports second coronavirus case: Health officials have confirmed the second local case of COVID-19 in Napa County. The patient is in isolation with health officials working to identify contacts, according to a county release. Napa County confirmed its first coronavirus case earlier on Sunday.

5:40 p.m. Santa Clara County employee tests positive: The director of communications and public affairs for Santa Clara County, Maria Leticia Gomez, has tested positive for COVID-19, the county announced. Gomez has been isolated at home since March 13, according to the county, which said in a release that Gomez agreed to share her health status with the public. The county is notifying employees about possible exposure. A county spokesperson said Sunday afternoon that no other county officials are exhibiting symptoms. Before working for the county, Gomez was a journalist for Bay Area’s Univision channel, KDTV-14.

5:22: CDC shares new guidelines for dealing with the homeless: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on Sunday released new guidelines for dealing with unsheltered homeless people around the nation regarding COVID-19, and they largely match what San Francisco already laid out as policy over the past two weeks, and what The Chronicle has reported. The guidelines suggest providing hand hygiene and restroom facilities near homeless encampments and sending out street counselors to advise campers to maintain social distancing while on the street and in their tents. Most striking among the suggestions is that people sleeping outdoors should be left there and not moved inside “unless individual housing units are available,” because the process of clearing camps and moving people into crowded settings can spread the disease. This policy is being interpreted throughout the Bay Area to mean that existing and newly created shelters in auditoriums and the like can be used if there is adequate social distancing space within them. It’s also interpreted by community policy leaders and homeless advocates as calling for an end to sweeps dismantling encampments, and homeless program managers say they are following that advice during the virus crisis. Read the CDC guidelines are here.

4:55 p.m. Marin County to close all parks: All parks in Marin County will be closed immediately under an order from the county’s Public Health Division. The closure includes town, city and county parks, open preserves, state parks and federal areas including the Point Reyes National Seashore and Muir Woods National Monument, according to a county release. The order comes one day after visitors crowded Marin County beaches and parks despite California’s shelter-in-place order. Marin County Sheriff’s Sgt. Brenton Schneider said crowds were “creating unsafe conditions for employees” at local businesses who were “fearful about all the close contact that they’re witnessing.” The parks closure impacts more than 18,000 acres managed by the county.

4:40 p.m. Santa Clara County reports 39 new cases: Officials reported 39 new cases of COVID-19 in Santa Clara County, bringing the county’s total number of cases to 302. The county also reported two new fatalities Sunday and have now reported 10 total deaths.

4:35 p.m. Gilead suspends individual requests for potential COVID-19 drug: Bay Area company Gilead Sciences will temporarily stop accepting individual requests for access to remdesivir, an antiviral in trials as a possible treatment for COVID-19, due to recent “overwhelming demand.” Gilead said in a statement it will continue to accept compassionate use requests for pregnant women and children under 18 with confirmed COVID-19 and “severe manifestations.” The company said it is working to process previously approved requests and expand access programs that could allow patients to acquire the drug “in a similar timeframe” as through individual requests. Gilead said it has seen an “exponential increase” in compassionate use requests and it is working “to rapidly assess the safety and efficacy of remdesivir as a potential treatment for COVID-19 through multiple ongoing clinical trials.”

4:05 p.m. Medical structures to be built in California: As part of it’s order to be activated in California, the National Guard is expected to build eight medical structures with about 2,000 beds in the state. The specific sites of the structures will be decided by Gov. Gavin Newsom, according to FEMA director Pete Gaynor.

3:52 p.m. Trump believes stimulus bill will pass: Despite another day of breakdowns in negotiations about a $2 trillion stimulus package aimed at softening the economic blow from the coronavirus pandemic, President Donald Trump believes a bill will be passed soon. “I think we’ll get there. To me, it’s not that complicated. You have to help the worker. We have to save the companies.”

3:50 p.m. Alameda County reports surge in case count: Health officials reported 35 new cases of COVID-19 in Alameda County on Sunday, bringing the total number of positive cases in the county to 106. That includes a total of six reported cases in the City of Berkeley, which has its own health department. On Saturday, there were 71 positive cases total being reported in Alameda County. City of Berkeley reported on its website its six reported cases reflect only lab-confirmed cases and data shows that “there is substantial community spread in our area.”

3:40 p.m. Yolo County reports first COVID-19 fatality: Health officials have reported the first fatality associated with COVID-19 in Yolo County. The victim was an older adult with underlying chronic health problems who acquired the virus through community transmission and was the sixth confirmed case in Yolo County, reported officials from the county that includes Davis and part of Sacramento. “Our first COVID-10 death in Yolo County marks a grim turn in the local course of this disease,” county chair Gary Sandy said in a statement. “Our thoughts are with the individual’s family and friends. It is a sad reminder that everyone must shelter in place.”

3:20 p.m. Navy hospital ship to be deployed to Los Angeles: FEMA director Pete Gaynor said Navy hospital ship Mercy will be deployed to Los Angeles and should arrive within a week to help with the state’s response to the coronavirus pandemic.

3:18 p.m. Futures market signal stock declines: Dow Jones industrial average futures fell 5% Sunday, hitting a “limit down” set to prevent wild swings in the market. Futures trading sets the tone for the next day’s trading in the stock market, suggesting further declines are in store Monday despite the government’s wave of stimulus-program announcements.

3:19 p.m. John Muir, Kaiser ask for donated medical supplies: Kaiser in San Francisco and John Muir Health in the East Bay are also making calls for masks, respirators and other increasingly scarce medical gear which they anticipate needing to care for COVID-19 patients. See what the hospitals need and where you can drop off supplies.

3 p.m. Trump promises Major Disaster Declaration to California: Just minutes after Gov. Gavin Newsom requested a Major Disaster Declaration, President Donald Trump promised the assistance to California. The declarations have already been approved in New York and Washington. “We’re working on getting that done really quickly. Maybe tonight,” said Trump, regarding Newsom’s request.

3 p.m. Harvey Weinstein reportedly tests positive for COVID-19: Former movie producer Harvey Weinstein has tested positive for COVID-19 while in prison for rape and sexual assault, the CNHI media group reported. Weinstein is being isolated at Wende Correctional Facility in Western New York and is one of two inmates at the facility who have tested positive, according to CNHI. Officials told CNHI that Weinstein likely had the virus when he was transferred from Rikers Island last week. Weinstein, 68, is serving a 23-year prison sentence for rape and sexual assault. (Source: Niagara Gazette)

2:50 p.m. Newsom requests Presidential Major Disaster Declaration: Gov. Gavin Newsom requested a Major Disaster Declaration to assist in California’s COVID-19 preparedness and emergency response efforts in a letter to President Donald Trump on Sunday. The Major Disaster Declaration would include all individual assistance programs to assist those affected by the outbreak and lessen the economic impacts of the crisis, including mass care, emergency assistance, crisis counseling, case management, unemployment assistance, legal services and supplemental nutrition assistance.

2:50 p.m. Justice Department files first action against alleged COVID-19 fraud: The Department of Justice made its first move in federal court to combat fraud related to the coronavirus pandemic Sunday, filing an enforcement action in Austin against operators of a fraudulent website. The civil complaint alleges that the operators of the website “coronavirusmedicalkit.com” are engaging in a wire fraud scheme seeking to profit from the confusion and widespread fear surrounding COVID-19. Information published on the website claimed to offer consumers access to World Health Organization (WHO) vaccine kits in exchange for a shipping charge of $4.95.

1:56 p.m. Chinese airlines resume SFO flights: Air China, China Eastern and China Southern have resumed flights between China and SFO, the airport said on its website. Air China’s Beijing route is back in operation, though its frequency has not yet been finalized, and China Southern is once again flying between Guangzhou and SFO. China Eastern will resume a daily Shanghai flight on Sunday, March 29. Travel remains limited between China and the U.S., with most foreign nationals barred from travel, and enhanced entry screening and 14-day self-quarantine requirements remain in place for U.S. citizens and other people permitted to travel to the U.S. from China.

1:05 p.m. ESPN employees test positive for COVID-19: Two New York City-based ESPN employees have tested positive for COVID-19, according to an internal company memo obtained by the Sports Business Journal. In the memo, ESPN said the unnamed employees last worked in the office March 11-12, and all employees who came into close contact with them have been instructed to self-isolate.

12:41 p.m. Defense Department reports first coronavirus death: The Defense Department on Sunday reported its first coronavirus death, saying it was a contractor older than 60 who had worked outside the Pentagon. The Pentagon did not release the contractor’s name, but said he worked for an agency that enforces technology transfer regulations when a U.S. military weapon is sold overseas. Defense Department spokesperson Carla Gleason said the confirmed coronavirus cases among the military rose from 67 on Friday to 111 early Sunday.

12:41 p.m. The man behind the sequencing of coronavirus could have keys to the disease: The new NextSeq 550 sequencing machine at UCSF’s clinical lab on Berry Street looks like a microwave with a computer keyboard, but to microbiologist Charles Chiu, it is the key to California’s fight against the deadliest, most invasive virus to strike humanity in decades. Read the story The Chronicle’s Peter Fimrite wrote on this crucial effort.

12:30 p.m. UCSF to open donation sites Monday: UCSF will open three donation sites, two in San Francisco and one in Oakland, for unused or otherwise usable medical supplies. See our detailed FAQ for UCSF’s exact needs. The hospital system can only accept specified items as its storage space is limited. Other Bay Area hospitals are asking for donations of protective equipment as well. See other ways to help the needy and vulnerable now.

12:14 p.m. Napa County confirms its first coronavirus case: Napa County confirmed its first case of the coronavirus Sunday and issued a legal order forcing the person to isolate and for their close contacts to quarantine. Napa is one of nine Bay Area counties to have issued stay-at-home orders within the last week.

12:01 p.m. Ohio issues stay-at-home order: Ohio Gov. Mike DeWine announced that a stay-at-home order has been signed by the state’s health department director and will go into effect at 11:59 p.m. (Eastern) on Monday. Ohio follows California, Illinois and New York in issuing similar mandates.

11:32 a.m. International Olympic Committee considers postponement, not cancellation, of Tokyo Olympics: The executive board of the International Olympic Committee said Sunday it will increase scenario-planning for the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo. The scenarios will range from modifications, allowing the games to go ahead with the July 24 scheduled start, to postponing the opening ceremony. The executive board has given itself a four-week deadline to consider postponement options, but it has ruled out a complete cancellation.

11:24 a.m. German Chancellor Merkel in quarantine: German Chancellor Angela Merkel has gone into quarantine after being informed that a doctor who administered a vaccine to her has tested positive for the coronavirus. Merkel, 65, received a precautionary vaccine Friday against pneumococcal infection, according to her spokesperson. She’ll undergo regular tests in the coming days and work from home.

11:14 a.m. Hayward to open testing center: The city of Hayward will open a testing facility Monday where sick people, first responders and health care workers with suspected exposure to the coronavirus can get tested, the city announced Sunday.The COVID-19 Testing Center at Hayward Fire Station #7, 28270 Huntwood Avenue., will open daily 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. and will be managed by Hayward firefighter-paramedics along with EMTs. It’s free and open to anyone, regardless of immigration status, the city said. Hayward officials partnered with Avellino Lab USA, Inc. in Menlo Park, to open the testing center.

11:12 a.m. Rand Paul tests positive for COVID-19: Kentucky senator Rand Paul has tested positive for COVID-19, according to his official Twitter account. A statement from his office said: “He is feeling fine and is in quarantine. He is asymptomatic and was tested out of an abundance of caution due to his extensive travel and events. … He expects to be back in the Senate after his quarantine periods ends and will continue to work for the people of Kentucky at this difficult time.”

11:03 a.m. Deluge of visitors forces Bay Area parks to consider shutdowns: A deluge of visitors this weekend, many not practicing recommended coronavirus “social distancing” practices and parking illegally after finding full lots, is forcing Bay Area officials to close popular areas and consider shutdowns. “Visitation is insane,” said Bob Doyle, general manager of the East Bay Regional Parks District. “In my 45 years of park work, I’ve never seen these type of crowds, not ever. People are desperate to get outside.”

The Point Reyes National Seashore in West Marin on Sunday closed Limantour Road, Drakes Beach, Drakes Estero and Mount Vision Road and limited access to Pierce Point, Palomarin, Point Reyes Lighthouse and Chimney Rock Headlands. Marin County Parks closed Agate Beach near Stinson Beach and McNears and Paradise Beach on the bay.

10:45 a.m. Opera singer Placido Domingo tests positive: Spanish Opera singer Placido Domingo said Sunday he tested positive for coronavirus. In a post on his Facebook page, Domingo said he experienced fever and cough symptoms and decided to get tested. He is in self-isolation with his family, he said.“I beg everyone to be extremely careful, follow the basic guidelines by washing your hands frequently, keeping at least a 6 feet distance from others, doing everything you can to stop the virus from spreading and please above all stay home if you can!” he wrote. “Together we can fight this virus and stop the current worldwide crisis, so we can hopefully return to our normal daily lives very soon.” Domingo, 79, one of the world’s top opera stars, has recently been accused by several women of sexual misconduct, which has led to several of his performances being canceled and an apology from the singer, according to the Associated Press.

10:15 a.m. Trumps fires back on Twitter: President Trump took to Twitter to take shots at governors, lawmakers and media for demanding federal response to the coronavirus pandemic. “Shouldn’t be blaming the federal government for their own shortcomings,” Trump posted on social media. “We are there to back you up should you fail, and always will be!” Democrats have been asking for help with acquiring medical resources and questioning why Trump hasn’t yet made military resources available after activating the Defense Production Act last week.

9:51 a.m. Schumer criticizes Senate stimulus bill: Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer told reporters, “We need a bill that puts workers first. Not corporations,” as he headed to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell’s office for further negotiations on the stimulus bill. House Democrats plan to introduce their own version of a more than $1 trillion stimulus package to soften the economic blow from the coronavirus pandemic in hopes of voting by Monday.

9:34 a.m. Pelosi on Senate stimulus package: House will introduce its own bill Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., says there is no bipartisan agreement yet on a massive coronavirus stimulus bill being negotiated in the Senate Sunday. As a result, she said House Democrats will draft their own coronavirus legislation, according to reports from Bloomberg News and The Hill. “We’ll be introducing our own bill and hopefully it will be compatible with what they discuss on the Senate side,” Pelosi said Sunday.

9:22 a.m. FEMA to prioritize shipments of medical supplies: President Trump’s top emergency management official on Sunday said regions that are not severely affected by the coronavirus outbreak will have to wait to receive hospital masks, ventilators and other protective medical supplies, the New York Times reported. “There’s hundreds of requests — virtually every state in the union looking for the same thing, and it’s not just the demand nationally, it’s a demand globally for these items,” said Peter T. Gaynor, administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

8:57 a.m. Update on coronavirus cases in San Francisco: The city of San Francisco has confirmed 21 cases of COVID-19, bringing the total to 105, according to the latest information provided by the department of public health Sunday morning. San Francisco issued a “Stay at Home” order this week in hopes of reducing the spread of coronavirus.

8:43 a.m. Cuomo calls to nationalize acquisitions of medical supplies: New York Governor Andrew M. Cuomo is looking to dramatically increase hospital capacity in his state amid the coronavirus pandemic, including sites scrambling to find protective masks for health care workers and hospital beds for patients. In a briefing from Albany on Sunday morning, Cuomo said New York has about 53,000 hospital beds, and experts indicate the state could need 110,000. Price gouging has forced the state to buy 85-cent masks for as much as $7 in some instances. “Money follows need,” Cuomo said, suggesting the federal government should first help the states most impacted by the pandemic: California, New York and Washington.

8:19 a.m. Mnuchin expects stimulus bill agreement: This just in from the Associated Press: “U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin says he expects Congress and the White House to reach full agreement later Sunday on an economic stimulus package that could approach $2 trillion to address the coronavirus crisis.

The package would include $3,000 checks to families and other aid to last the next 10 weeks.

Mnuchin tells “Fox News Sunday” that there is a “fundamental understanding” reached with Republican and Democratic congressional leaders to provide significant aid.”

7:45 a.m. Will California’s shelter in place work to slow the pandemic?: California has launched a massive attack in pandemic warfare — something not seen in more than a century, since the 1918 Spanish flu. Will it work? How long before we know? And what happens when we let everyone run wild again? The Chronicle’s Erin Allday examines all those questions here.

7:10 a.m. ICE asks for 45,000 medical masks: As medical staff across the U.S. face an alarming shortage of medical masks to treat COVID-19 patients, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement is looking to acquire thousands of the same masks. ICE said it’s in need of 45,000 masks for all 26 of its field offices for “enforcement and removal.” “Would like delivery within 30 days,” the agency posted on a government website Friday. Doctors and nurses in the Bay Area and beyond have made calls for more of these masks, which help protect them from contracting the virus. Menlo Park tech company Facebook has vowed to donate 720,000 masks to help health care workers around the world. ICE on Sunday said the masks are part of “standard law enforcement personal protective equipment.”

7 a.m. Pope calls for joint prayer: Pope Francis is asking all Christians to join him in a recitation of the ‘’Our Father’’ prayer at noon on Wednesday, according to the Associated Press. ‘’To the virus pandemic, we want to respond with the universality of prayer, of compassion, of tenderness,’’ the pope said. Francis plans to

6:52 a.m. Italian premier orders more restrictions: Italian Premier Giuseppe Conte has stepped-up lockdown measures in his country, which has seen 4,825 residents die from coronavirus. Going forward, Italy will shut down all production facilities, excluding those deemed to provide essential goods and services.

“We are facing the most serious crisis that the country has experienced since World War II,’’ Conte told the country during a midnight broadcast, according to an Associated Press report.

6:45 a.m. Australia shuts down non-essential services: Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced a nationwide ban on non-essential services, in a country where coronavirus cases have spiked, surpassing 1,300 according to this BBC story.

6:26 a.m. Global update on coronavirus outbreak: Italy, Iran and the U.S. remain at the forefront of a pandemic that’s sweeping across the globe. Here is the Associated Press round-up of international coronavirus news.

6:07 a.m. The numbers behind the coronavirus pandemic demand an urgent response: Since mid-February, the number of new coronavirus cases reported in the Bay Area each week has been doubling or tripling the total from the week before — a phenomenon known as exponential growth, which means the regional outbreak is on a steep, and concerning, upward trajectory. The Chronicle’s Erin Allday takes a deep dive into the numbers surrounding coronavirus in the Bay Area.

5:30 a.m. How will the Bay Area’s shelter-in-place edict affect open houses and how properties are marketed? Read The Chronicle’s Q&A on the possible impact coronavirus could have on the regional housing market.

More developments from March 21:

11:23 p.m. Facebook to donate masks and gloves to medical workers: The Menlo Park tech company plans to donate 720,000 masks — a combination of the coveted N95 masks and more basic surgical masks — and 1.5 million pairs of gloves to health-care workers around the world. Facebook officials said they bought the masks for their offices’ emergency disaster kits following wildfires in California. Chronicle reporter Janelle Bitker has the report.

11:02 p.m. Bay Area gun store refused to close for shelter in place: Up until Friday, the owner of Castro Valley’s Solar Tactical gun shop remained defiant, despite the countywide shelter-in-place order that began Tuesday due to the coronavirus outbreak. Mike Addis maintained that his business is enshrined by the Second Amendment and provides an essential service, and it would therefore remain open. But a day after a spat between the gun shop and the Alameda County Sheriff’s Office spilled onto social media Addis reluctantly closed his doors to the public. For the day, anyway.

10:50 p.m. Sonoma County virus cases climb: The North Bay county announced two more cases of the new coronavirus on Saturday, bringing the total for the county to 23.

10:40 p.m. Best Buy announces service changes: Electronics chain Best Buy announced Saturday it’s temporarily closing stores and switching to curbside delivery at its locations. Customers ordering from Best Buy’s website or app can have items delivered to their car curbside. Returns and exchanges can also be conducted curbside, the retailer said, but trade-in and recycling services are suspended. Best Buy is also suspending home installation, repair and haul-away of large items like washers, dryers, TVs and refrigerators. Starting Monday, Best Buy said it will offer free doorstep delivery on those items but will not bring the items into homes.

10 p.m. Alameda County reports 20 new COVID-19 cases: County officials reported 20 new cases of COVID-19 on Saturday, bringing the total number of positive cases in the county to 71. That includes a total of six cases in the City of Berkeley, which has its own health department. The City of Berkeley also confirmed its first community-transmitted case on Saturday, according to Berkeleyside.

9:45 p.m. Point Reyes National Seashore to limit access after “unprecedented visitation”: Parks officials will limit access and close the gates to Limantour Access and Mt. Vision roads, Drakes Beach and Drakes Estero after “unprecedented visitation” to the Point Reyes National Seashore on Saturday. There will be limited access at Palomarin Trailhead beyond the Commonweal entrance, Pierce Point Road and the Lighthouse and Chimney Rock parking lots, parks officials said Saturday night. The announcement was made just hours after Marin County Sheriff’s officials urged people who flocked to the Northern California coast to stay home instead.

8:55 p.m. Marin County case count holds at 38: Health officials reported no new confirmed cases of COVID-19 in Marin County on Saturday. On Friday, the county reported 13 new cases. Marin County is reporting 38 confirmed cases with four of those patients hospitalized. The county has tested 430 people, it reported Saturday, up from 357 on Friday. Dr. Lisa Santora, public health officer, noted in a video update that Marin County saw “thousands” of visitors to its outdoor sites Saturday and urged people to restrict non-essential travel as the county “is not ready to safely host this volume of visitors.”

8:40 p.m. Marriott furloughing thousands of corporate employees: With travel numbers shrinking worldwide hotel giant Marriott International Inc., intends to furlough about two-thirds of its corporate staff both at its headquarters in Bethesda, Md., and abroad, the Wall Street Journal reported. The news comes after Marriott said earlier in the week that it expects to furlough tens of thousands of hotel employees. WSJ reported that Marriott’s chief executive told employees Thursday the company is doing business at about 75 percent below normal levels, the worst period in its history. Marriott counts 30 brands and more than 7,000 properties worldwide.

8:30 p.m. First confirmed case in Butte County: Public health officials announced the first confirmed case of the new coronavirus in Butte County on Saturday evening. The patient, identified only as an “older adult” with chronic health conditions, has “a mild illness” and is currently isolating at home, according to public health officials in Butte County, which includes the cities of Chico and Oroville, north of Sacramento.

8:10 p.m. Newsom issues executive order on health care capacity: Gov. Gavin Newsom has issued an executive order that allows the state’s public health department to waive licensing and staffing requirements at clinics, hospices, adult day health care and mobile health care units. In a statement, Newsom said: “These emergency legal tools will increase California’s health care capacity and help facilities treat more patients.” The order also suspends local ordinances that restrict or inhibit the delivery of necessities such as food and pharmaceuticals to grocery stores and other distributing channels.

7:30 p.m. Temporary Federal Medical Station being prepared in Santa Clara: In coordination with the United States Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response, Santa Clara County officials are preparing a Federal Medical Station inside of the City of Santa Clara Convention Center to care for up to 250 people “in preparation for a potential increase in demands on our healthcare system as COVID-19 cases rise,” county public health officials announced Saturday. Federal officials will manage the station, which will provide beds, supplies and medication for “short-term, sub-acute care for individuals who do not have COVID-19,” which officials said will increase capacity for hospital beds.

6:45 p.m. Coast Guard medevacs Grand Princess crewmember:A crewmember from the Grand Princess was taken from the cruise ship by U.S. Coast Guard medevac Saturday, the Coast Guard reported. Coast Guard was notified Saturday morning that the crewmember, a man in his early 40s, had a medical emergency and needed further attention. Coast Guard transported the crewmember by response boat to emergency medical services waiting at Coyote Point in San Mateo. The Grand Princess has been anchored in San Francisco Bay since Monday. Passengers from the ship are quarantined at Travis Air Force Base in Fairfield. Seven passengers from the Grand Princess have tested positive for COVID-19, despite being asymptamatic.

6:30 p.m. California state prison employees tests positive for virus: An employee who works at California State Prison, Sacramento and two employees at the California Institution for Men in Chino (San Bernardino County), have tested positive for the new coronavirus, according to California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation officials. A San Quentin State Prison employee who previously was reported as testing positive “ultimately was a negative case,” corrections officials said Saturday. There are zero confirmed cases among the incarcerated population, officials said.

6:24 p.m. Hawaii to quarantine all travelers for 14 days: Hawaii Gov. David Ige announced on Saturday that he signed an emergency proclamation mandating 14-day quarantine for everyone arriving into Hawaii, including visitors and returning residents. “This mandate is the first of its kind in the nation,” he said during a press conference that was live-streamed on Facebook. This mandate goes into effect at midnight on Thursday, March 26.

6:10 p.m. “No plans” to shut down California highways, state ports of entry: Gov. Gavin Newsom said state officials have “No plans at this moment” to shut down highways or ports of entry into California, but said he had anticipated the Trump Administration’s recent decision to stop nonessential traffic on the United States-Mexico border. “To be candid with you, we haven’t even discussed any planning along these lines,” Newsom said. “Not surprisingly, there was a variant of that in Southern California on the border, that was part of an anticipated move by the administration, so we are in real time adjusting to those concerns.”

5:57 p.m. VP Pence, wife test negative for virus: Vice President Mike Pence and his wife Karen have tested negative for COVID-19, according to a spokesperson. CNN reported Friday a staff member in Pence’s office had tested positive for the virus. VP Press Secretary Katie Miller wrote on Twitter on Saturday: “Pleased to report that the COVID-19 test results came back negative for both Vice President @Mike_Pence and Second Lady @KarenPence.” On Friday, Miller said neither Pence nor President Donald Trump had had “close contact” with the staff member.

5:40 p.m. Newsom tells youth it’s “Time to wake up”: Gov. Gavin Newsom used part of his news conference to address “young people” in California about the importance of social distancing practices. “Just assume that you potentially are contagious and act accordingly,” Newsom said. “Just use common sense. Be a good neighbor, be a good citizen. “Those young people that are still out there on the beaches thinking this is a party? Time to grow up. Time to wake up. Time to recognize it’s not just about the old folks, it’s about your impact on their lives. Don’t be selfish. Recognize you have responsibility to meet this moment as well.”

5:35 p.m. Unemployment claims climb in California: Gov. Gavin Newsom said Saturday that the number of unemployment claims in the state has risen sharply over the last week. In a news conference, Newsom said there were 40,000 unemployment claims six days ago. Two days ago, there were 135,000. Newsom said there were 114,000 claims made Friday with numbers for Saturday not yet available. “It gives you the sense of the magnitude of those who are struggling at this moment,” Newsom said.

5:30 p.m. California sets new goal for 51,000 hotel rooms to house homeless: In a Saturday evening news conference, California Gov. Gavin Newsom said state officials have set a new goal of identifying and acquiring 51,000 hotel rooms to house people experiencing homelessness as part of the state’s coronavirus response.

5:25 p.m. Gov. Newsom says Elon Musk providing masks, ventilators: Tesla CEO Elon Musk has pledged to provide California with needed medical supplies, Gov. Gavin Newsom said during a news conference Saturday evening. Musk is “working overtime” with other companies to provide 250,000 masks for health care professionals and has committed to providing 1,000 ventilators, Newsom said. Apple CEO Tim Cook is also providing an additional 1 million masks, Newsom said.

5:18 p.m. Trump commands stage, Joe Biden plays a bit part: The presidential election may hinge on how well President Trump handles the coronavirus pandemic. Meanwhile, Joe Biden is finding it hard to crowbar his way into the headlines. Chronicle senior political writer Joe Garofoli has the story.

5:07 p.m. Marin County Sheriff urges people to stay home: Following a large influx of visitors to the Northern California coast on Saturday, the Marin County Sheriff’s office took to social media to urge people to stay home: “We understand the communities frustrations with the large amount of people traveling to the coast today and not practicing social distancing. We are working with the Public Health Officers to address the issue. Please stay at home!” Officials also closed access to Sky Oaks Road in Fairfax, which leads to the county’s watershed.

4:58 p.m. Colorado records 6 coronavirus deaths, including entertainer: The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment said that five people have died from the new coronavirus as of Friday, while Eagle County officials announced another death on Saturday, bringing the state’s total up to six. The Vail Daily reported that family members identified the Eagle County victim as Rod Powell, a popular local entertainer. Colorado has 475 confirmed cases of COVID-19, with 49 patients hospitalized, the health department said Saturday.

4:53 p.m. Representatives call for expanding Rural Health Care Program: Reps. Anna Eshoo, D-Palo Alto, and Mike Doyle, D-Pa., have asked the FCC to expand eligibility to the Rural Health Care Program to aid with COVID-19 response. The Rural Health Care Program helps fund internet connectivity for eligible health care facilities to improve access for patients in rural communities. The representatives’ letter asks the FCC to loosen restrictions to let non-rural providers apply for support under the program. The letter also states the FCC previously loosened restrictions on the RHCP in 2005 after Hurricane Katrina.

4:36 p.m. Federal inmate tests positive for coronavirus: The Bureau of Prisons reported that an inmate at a New York jail has tested positive for the coronavirus on Saturday, marking the first confirmed case in the federal prison system. Officials said the man had recently arrived at the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn and was tested for COVID-19 after complaining of chest pains.

4:19 p.m. Illinois Governor asks retired health care workers to return to work: Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker asked health care professionals who have recently retired or moved onto other careers to return to work on Saturday, promising to waive fees and expedite licensing so they can immediately rejoin the workforce in the state’s fight against COVID-19. He also said that Illinois will automatically extend licenses for all medical professionals through the end of September. “This is heroes’ work and all of you have our deepest gratitude for your willingness to serve,” Pritzker said.

4:15 p.m. First death from coronavirus reported in Monterey County: A Monterey County resident has died from the new coronavirus, which marks the first death in the Northern California county, Monterey County public health officials announced on Saturday. The patient was identified only as an adult with an underlying health condition. “This is a tragic development,” said Dr. Edward Moreno, the Monterey County Health Officer and Director of Public Health. “The Monterey County Health Department is taking necessary, carefully considered steps to slow down the spread of the disease and to protect those at greatest risk.” There have been 11 confirmed cases of the new coronavirus among Monterey County residents, at least 2 of which appear to have been acquired locally, county health officials said.

4:03 p.m. Hawaii reports 11 new cases of COVID-19: Hawaii’s Department of Health reported 11 new cases of coronavirus on Saturday, bringing the total to 48 people who have tested positive statewide. By county, Honolulu has 38 reported cases, Maui has 5, Kauai has 4 and Hawaii has 1.

3:55 p.m. Where to donate masks, medical supplies in the Bay Area: Local hospitals — which are running low on masks, gowns, face shields and other protective equipment needed by health care workers to safely treat coronavirus patients — are starting to accept donations from manufacturers, companies and the public. Click here to find out where and how to help.

3:45 p.m. Santa Clara County reports 67 new cases: Health officials reported that Santa Clara County had 263 positive COVID-19 cases as of Saturday afternoon, an increase of 67 from the previous day. In a release, the county said the increase was “not unexpected given community transmission, an increase in provider reporting, and growing testing capacity through the commercial market.” The county’s previous largest increase in daily reported cases was 24.

3:09 p.m. Global cases surpass 300,000: The latest figures from John Hopkins University show global coronavirus cases have broken through the 300,000 barrier, with over 12,900 deaths reported. Italy remains the hardest hit nation, with 4,825 deaths reported, according to figures posted Saturday afternoon.

2:47 p.m. Trump may offer enrollment to ACA health care: The Trump Administration might launch a special enrollment period under the Affordable Care Act so people can sign up for health coverage, the Wall Street Journal reported. Nearly 30 million people nationwide are uninsured. At least nine states that run their own exchanges have said they might let people buy coverage under ACA. The Journal did not specify which states.

2:41 p.m. Bay Area residents try to stay social, keep their distance: Outdoor dance parties and neighborhood gatherings, with plenty of distance between attendees, have cropped up in the Bay Area as residents try to remain upbeat and cope with the state’s shelter-in-place edict.

2:30 p.m. Santa Clara University law student tests positive: A Santa Clara University law student who lives off-campus has tested positive for COVID-19, the school reported Friday night. The student was last on campus March 6 and is self-isolating at home under the guidance of medical and public health officials. University officials are reaching out to individuals with known exposure to the student. The university also said another student who was tested for the virus on March 12 has tested negative.

2:21 p.m. The scene from San Francisco’s Embarcadero: On most days, the Ferry Building’s marketplace is so jammed that it’s impossible to stay 6 feet away from the next customer. On Saturday, it was not only possible but required. The Chronicle’s Steve Rubenstein ventured out to report from the streets of San Francisco.

1:51 p.m. Despite no symptoms, seven Grand Princess passengers test positive for coronavirus: Seven Grand Princess cruise ship passengers quarantined at Travis Air Force Base — all with no symptoms — tested positive for COVID-19, The Chronicle has learned, as the first batch of swab results from the voluntary testing came back Friday.

1:33 p.m. Newsom distributes millions in emergency health care funding: Gov. Gavin Newsom directed about $42 million in emergency funding for California’s health care system, and services and equipment for the state’s response to COVID-19. Thirty million dollars will be put toward leasing Seton Medical Center in Daly City, whose owners had declared bankruptcy, and St. Vincent Medical Center in Los Angeles, which closed in January. The lease will last three months. Starting Wednesday, Seton Medical Center will provide care for 120 COVID-19 patients. St. Vincent Medical Center will reopen and provide care for up to 336 COVID-19 patients. A reopening date for the center was not announced.

1:17 p.m. Bay Area cases, county-by-county: The latest figures on The Chronicle’s Coronavirus Tracker, compiled midday Saturday, show the following number of cases and deaths, by county:

• Alameda County (48 cases, zero deaths);

• Contra Costa (46 cases, one death);

• Marin County (38 cases, zero deaths);

• Napa County (no cases or deaths);

• San Francisco (84 cases, zero deaths);

• San Mateo County (110 cases, one death);

• Santa Clara County (196 cases, eight deaths);

• Solano County (13 cases, zero deaths);

• Sonoma County (22 cases, one death).

12:56 p.m. Gold medalist joins call to postpone Olympics: Nathan Adrian, a five-time Olympic gold medalist and former Cal swimmer, added his voice to the growing call to postpone the 2020 Tokyo Games, joining pleas from the USA Swimming and Track and Field teams. Adrian raised doubts about safety and fairness. “Would a gold medal even mean the same in these Olympics?” Adrian said in an interview with The Chronicle. “It would just mean that person was able to train.” Adrian, who returned to the Bay Area early this week, said he’s probably limited to dry-land workouts since pools are closed.

12:48 p.m. U.S. cases surpass 22,000: The latest data from John Hopkins University show the number of verified coronavirus cases has surpassed 22,000, hitting 22,177 by midday Saturday. Bookmark The Chronicle’s Coronavirus Tracker to follow in-depth, regional data on the spread of the disease.

12:10 p.m. FDA approves quick coronavirus test: The Food and Drug Administration has approved the first rapid coronavirus test. The test, created by a molecular diagnostics company, approves results in 45 minutes. Current tests can take a few days to produce results. The Sunnyvale-based company, Cepheid, said it will begin shipping tests next week.

11:58 a.m. FAA reverses NYC, Philadelphia suspension: The FAA reversed its suspension of flights to New York City area and Philadelphia airports after about 30 minutes, according to the Associated Press. The suspension was initially due to staffing issues at a regional air-traffic control center and was expected to be in place for several hours. No immediate information was released on the directive.

11:41 a.m. New York, Philadelphia flights suspended: The FAA said it is suspending flights to airports in New York City and Philadelphia due to coronavirus-staffing issues, according to the Associated Press.

11:18 a.m. Puerto Rico reports first COVID-19 death: The Health Department says an Italian tourist ,who arrived in the U.S. territory aboard the Costa Luminosa cruise ship, marks Puerto Rico’s first coronavirus death. Officials say 21 people in Puerto Rico have tested positive for COVID-19 and another 71 are awaiting test results. At least 124 people have been arrested for violating curfew imposed earlier this week to slow the spread of the virus.

11:11 a.m. No Olympic decision: President Trump says he hasn’t taken a position about whether the 2020 Olympics should be postponed or canceled, saying he would rather leave that decision to Japanese leaders.

11:07: Italy reports 793 coronavirus deaths in the last 24 hours: Italy reported 793 deaths and 6,557 new cases of coronavirus on Saturday, according to the Associated Press. The country has recorded 53,578 known cases of COVID-19, and 4,825 total deaths.

10:59 a.m. Senate leader presses lawmakers to back aid package: Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell on Saturday said negotiators are making “important progress,” but urged talks to wrap up, the Associated Press reported. “This is not a political opportunity, this is a national emergency,“ he said. “It’s time to come together, finalize the results of our bipartisan discussions and close this out.” McConnell said he wants to pass the aid package “as quickly as humanly possible.” White House legislative affairs director Eric Ueland joined McConnell’s call. “We need to act with urgency, we need to act with significance, we need to act with boldness,” he said.

10:55 a.m. Trump says masks coming quickly: In response to complaints about the unavailability of medical masks, Trump blamed previous administrations for having “done very little.” He went on to say the administration’s efforts are getting “tremendous reviews from many people who can’t believe how fast (masks) are coming.”

10:46 a.m. Focus on business: The stimulus effort, which could be around $2 trillion, must focus on keeping businesses from failing and workers employed, Trump said. If businesses fail, they may never come back, he warned.

10:42 Trump on economic stimulus package: President Trump said the goal of the stimulus effort is aimed at people keeping their jobs in advance of what some economists suggest will be a rapid financial rebound “once we solve this medical problem.”

10:39 a.m. Trump says he was tested for coronavirus again: When asked if he had been tested a second time for coronavirus, President Trump told assembled members of the press: “I just took one,” said Trump. “I feel great.”

10:34 a.m. People asked to delay medical procedures: People should “put off or cancel” all elective medical or surgical procedures, Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said at a press briefing Saturday. Not only could those procedures take up the time of medical workers who may be needed elsewhere, but the materials used — gowns, masks, respirators and others — could be better used for efforts against the virus.

10:29 a.m. Coronavirus testing is on the rise: The amount of coronavirus testing in the U.S. is quickly rising, but still should be limited to those most in danger: Those over 65 with symptoms, those with underlying conditions and others, said Admiral Brett Giroir, assistant secretary of health. “Testing is going well, it’s ramping up,” he said.

10:22 a.m. Vice President Pence on staffer who tested positive for coronavirus: “I am pleased to report that he is doing well,” said Pence, in a Saturday press briefing. “Neither the President or myself had contact with this person.” Pence went on to say the staffer has not been in the office since Monday, and that the vice president and his wife will be tested for coronavirus this afternoon.

10:16 a.m. Trump calls coronavirus an “invisible enemy”: In his daily press briefing, President Trump did not make any major news announcements. He did thank the American people for their efforts to fight coronavirus. “It’s a time of shared national sacrifice,” said Trump. “We’re going to be celebrating a great victory in the not too distant future.”

10:10 a.m. Trump recaps recent moves to combat coronavirus: At a Saturday press briefing, President Trump reiterated some of the recent moves made by his administration in relation to the coronavirus pandemic. Among the topics he spoke of: Congress is negotiating a relief bill that could provide relief for business im