WATCH:

Trump supporter Dion Cini is speaking out about the viral video of his altercation with transgender actress Indya Moore.

Cini is a huge fan of the president, and he’s not afraid to show it. He rarely leaves his home without his MAGA hat on and says he has regularly been putting on pro-trump demonstrations in front of Trump Tower in New York City for the past two years. (RELATED: Actor Tries to Steal Trump Supporter’s Sign, Then Plays the Victim When He Fights Back.)

Moore is an actress, writer model and social activist. She’s best known for her recent role in the television series “Pose,” which Google describes as a drama series set in the 1980s and follows the character “Blanca, who forms a ‘house,’ a self-selected family that provides support to LGBTQ youth who have been rejected by their birth families.”

Some in the media are accusing Cini of “attacking” Moore, but he says he was just pushing back after she attempted to take his pro-Trump banner.

Cini explained:

When I’m out there on the streets of New York, you have two options as a spectator: You can look or you can just turn around and keep walking. Any other option, I mean, you can ask questions, you can be nice, but any other except those two options is usually going to turn out to be a crime for the person who you know wants to do what they want to do when they’re coming by. Look or don’t look, it’s really that simple.

The views and opinions expressed in this commentary are those of the author and do not reflect the official position of The Daily Caller.

Check out TheDC’s fantastic videos and subscribe to our YouTube channel to avoid missing out.

SUBSCRIBE!

NOW CHECK OUT The Daily Caller’s most popular shows:

Nike Sides With Colin Kaepernick, Many Customers Revolt

Inside The Daily Caller’s Exclusive Oval Office Interview With President Donald Trump

Would You Rather Date A Trump Supporter or MS-13 Gang Member?

New Details About The ‘Muslim Extremist’ Compound In New Mexico

‘Trophy Culture’ Hijacks New Jersey High School Cheer Squad

Fact Checking White House ‘Truth Seekers’ On North Korea

Democrats’ New Campaign Message: ‘Drain The Swamp’

‘Fake News’ Defends Brutal MS-13 Gang

Follow Stephanie Hamill on Twitter