Updated at 7:35 p.m: Revised to include additional details throughout.

Updated at 7:40 p.m.: Revised with information from Ellis County.

Even as Dallas County announced its highest death toll in one day, officials said Tuesday that they see signs the coronavirus curve is flattening.

County Judge Clay Jenkins predicted the county could reach its peak of cases late this month or in early May, but this is no time to ease up on social distancing, he said.

“I cannot stress to you how important it is that you don’t let off now,” he said. “The reason we’re getting good news from the medical folks — that you’re flattening the curve — is because you’re making good personal decisions.”

The risks remain high, though, as Tuesday’s report of 10 new deaths showed.

Dr. Philip Huang, the county’s health director, said the latest deaths may reflect infections contracted a week or two ago.

“It’s certainly possible that we may see more of that,” he said, adding that higher numbers of deaths have been seen in other communities. “This is what we’re all trying to address and keep death down as much as we can.”

The dead included five Dallas men. Two were in their 50s, one was in his 60s, another in his 70s and one in his 80s. The other victims were two Dallas women, one in her 50s and the other in her 90s; a DeSoto man in his 80s; a Garland man in his 30s; and a Mesquite woman in her 80s.

Among them were five residents of long-term care facilities — four lived at Brentwood Place One and the fifth lived at Brentwood Place Two, Jenkins said at a news conference Tuesday.

He said coronavirus cases in long-term care facilities are of particular concern “because once these get into a nursing home, it’s real hard to keep it from spreading.”

Coronavirus cases have been reported at nine such facilities in the county:

Monticello West in Oak Lawn: 17 residents have tested positive, including two deaths.

Skyline Nursing Center in west Oak Cliff: 34 residents have tested positive, 10 staff members have tested positive, and one death has been reported.

Edgemere Luxury Living in North Dallas: Eight residents have tested positive, including three who have died; two staff members have been confirmed positive.

Brentwood Place One in Pleasant Grove: Five deaths have been reported, and 40 residents and two staff members have tested positive.

Brentwood Place Two in Pleasant Grove: 10 residents have tested positive, and one death has been reported.

St. Joseph Village Coppell: One resident has tested positive.

The Villages of Dallas in east Oak Cliff: One resident has tested positive.

Winters Park Nursing and Rehabilitation Center in Garland: One resident and one staff member have tested positive, and one death has been recorded.

The Reserve at Richardson: Eight residents have tested positive, and one death has been reported.

Representatives from Monticello West, Skyline Nursing Center, Edgemere, Brentwood Place One and Two and the Reserve at Richardson did not return messages seeking comment. A representative from Winters Park could not be reached after business hours. A spokeswoman from St. Joseph Village Coppell confirmed a resident tested positive.

The administrator of The Villages of Dallas, Skyler Peterson, said in a statement that there were currently no COVID-19 positive staff or residents at the facility and said infection prevention and control was the facility’s highest priority.

Dallas County has reported 14 coronavirus deaths associated with long-term care facilities, out of 42 total deaths. That mirrors statewide figures, which show that up to a third of Texas’ COVID-19 deaths occurred in long-term care facilities.

The county also reported 89 more positive coronavirus tests Tuesday, raising its total to 1,877.

Jenkins said the county needs to dramatically increase its testing capabilities — both the number of tests performed each day, and how quickly results are processed — before the economy can reopen.

The holdup, he said, is an inadequate supply of a chemical needed to run the tests. He has requested the chemical from the state and the federal governments.

“Testing is what we desperately need right now,” Jenkins said. “Testing has become the biggest shortfall right now, even more than bed capacity.”

Testing at private labs far outpaces government testing in the county, he said.

On the government side, the federal testing sites at the Ellis Davis Field House and American Airlines Center each get 250 tests a day. Those have a turnaround time of about a week.

At Parkland Memorial Hospital, about 120 tests are performed on Parkland patients each day, he said. Those tests have a one-day turnaround, but the number is limited by the amount of testing supplies the county has.

“We have the people power and the machines to do 1,600 a day” at Parkland, Jenkins said.

If the same supplies the county wants to see at Parkland also got to UT Southwestern, the county’s capacity would jump by another 1,440 tests a day, he said.

Add three testing machines at UT Southwestern — that Jenkins said the county would pay for if the federal government would sell them — and the county could process more than 6,000 tests a day with one-day turnaround, he said.

He said increased testing would help home in on areas to find people who have contracted the virus, even if they’re asymptomatic, and get people separated to prevent further spread.

He mentioned DeSoto as an example of a community where cases are spreading through neighborhoods.

“We need it yesterday, but if we get it in the next few days, it will be such a better outcome than if we don’t,” he said.

Earlier in the day, Jenkins said in an interview with the Texas Tribune that reopening the economy as soon as possible is important but that he would begin to lift restrictions on workers only when he believed the pandemic was under control.

“We want to act to get the economy moving again, but not at the expense of a second wave,” he said. “It would be devastating if we had a second wave.”

As he has before, Jenkins downplayed any tension between himself and his fellow members of the Commissioners Court after commissioners put a check on his ability to extend the county’s stay-at-home order beyond April 30 without their support.

He also said lines of communication with the governor’s office are open after he exchanged terse letters with Gov. Greg Abbott’s chief of staff over a pop-up hospital at the Dallas convention center.

“I’ll be able to find several things I should have done differently” after the crisis is over, he said.

Tarrant County

Four more residents have died from complications of COVID-19, health officials said Tuesday.

All four are residents of Fort Worth: a man in his 70s, two men in their 80s and a woman in her 80s. All had underlying health conditions, county health officials said.

Tarrant County reported 53 new cases of the illness Tuesday, bringing its total to 929. The county has reported 29 total deaths and 103 recoveries.

Johnson County

Four more residents of Johnson County tested positive for the virus, county officials said Tuesday.

All four live in unincorporated parts of the county.

The county has had 39 total COVID-19 cases. Roughly half of those, 20, are residents of Burleson.

Denton County

A resident of the Denton Rehabilitation Center was Denton County’s 14th coronavirus-related death, officials said Tuesday.

The man was older than 80 and had been hospitalized.

“We hope everyone will take a moment to keep our fellow residents affected by this pandemic in your thoughts and prayers,” County Judge Andy Eads said in a written statement. “The seriousness of taking precautions cannot be overstated. With community spread endemic in our county, we must take the necessary steps to ensure we do not contribute to the problem.”

Officials reported 14 additional cases of COVID-19, raising the county’s total to 521. There have been 189 recoveries.

No additional cases were reported among residents of the Denton State Supported Living Center or any of the county’s long-term care facilities.

Collin County

Eight new positive coronavirus tests were reported in Collin County on Tuesday.

There were three duplicate entries in the county’s data, so the total number of COVID-19 cases increased by five, to 477.

Ten Collin County residents have died after contracting the virus, and 277 have recovered.

Rockwall County

Eight more cases have been reported in Rockwall County, officials said.

Five of the cases are in Rockwall, with one apiece in Fate, Heath and Royse City.

Ellis County

The Ellis County Local Health Authority has confirmed four additional cases of COVID-19 in Ellis County. This increases the countywide total to 83 cases.

These four new cases are residents of Waxahachie. They include a 33 year-old male and a 48-year-old female. The other two are residents of Legend Oaks Healthcare and Rehabilitation, ages 60 and 80.