'The weirdest thing is growing this bump by yourself': What pregnancy, birth are like in a pandemic

What its likes to be pregnant and have a new baby during coronavirus. What its likes to be pregnant and have a new baby during coronavirus. Photo: Mathieukor/Getty Images Photo: Mathieukor/Getty Images Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close 'The weirdest thing is growing this bump by yourself': What pregnancy, birth are like in a pandemic 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Dianna Pinto of Concord, Calif., gave birth to her first child only days after a shelter-in-place order was issued to stop the spread of COVID-19.

Pinto delivered at the Kaiser Permanente hospital in Walnut Creek and her birth unfolded as some do with a prolonged 36-hour labor ending in a Cesarean section. Hospitals typically allow women to welcome multiple guests at their labors—including friends, family, a midwife, or doula and, of course, spouses and partners—to offer support, take photos and share the experience.

In the age of coronavirus, hospitals are permitting only one guest. Pinto chose her husband.

When she looks back on her birth, she views it through a lens of optimism. "Initially, we had talked about wanting it to be only me and my husband in the delivery room," she said. "The shelter in place kind of worked out because we could tell family, 'We can’t have anyone in the room.' I think if anything, the nurses were able to focus more on me as a patient, versus dealing with family coming in and out."

But now that Pinto is home with her newborn, the no-visitors policy still stands, and while her husband has been home from work and "absolutely amazing" with his support, she's beginning to miss family and friends. Even her in-laws who live in the same town haven't met their grandson.

"We've had no visitors," said Pinto. "It literally has just been me and my husband for three weeks. I think that has been the worst part. He’s three weeks old and we can’t share this joy. It’s just too scary."

For this story, several pregnant women and new moms were interviewed. In all cases, they've had healthy pregnancies and births and voiced few complaints considering the positivity of their situations, but they all brought up one issue: loneliness and isolation. Their pregnancies and births have been filled with a lot of empty rooms and medical masks and this frames the experience as a cold, medical event rather than a more spiritual and natural one filled with connection and bonding with friends and family.

Pinto said the postpartum has been especially hard as the hormones kick in and those weeks when her parents were supposed to have been staying with them and helping have passed. "I feel a little lonely," she said. "I want my mom."

Ever since social distancing orders were issued in California in March, much of regular life has stopped. But pregnancies and births have naturally continued. Being pregnant, giving birth and being a new mom is generally the same as it was before, except women are going through a lot of the experience by themselves or with someone on a screen.

"Patients are coming to ultrasounds by themselves, their prenatal care by themselves," said Dr. Roxanna Irani, the medical director of obstetrics and gynecology at UC San Francisco. "We’re doing a considerable amount of tele-health visits. We are still absolutely doing in-person visits if a mom has concerns or complications, but we’re trying to limit their exposure."

Dr. Irani said virtual visits have been well-received because coming into the hospital for a prenatal appointment can be an ordeal as healthcare workers are doing everything possible to ensure the safety of patients and staff. Before a pregnant woman even comes to the hospital, she is screened over the phone to make sure she doesn't have COVID-19. She's screened again at the door of the hospital. Everyone she comes into contact with at a clinic or hospital is wearing masks and gloves.

San Francisco resident Leslie Smith who is due in July says she recently had a virtual prenatal appointment. "My doctor was almost wearing a Hazmat suit even over the VC," Smith said.

Oakland resident Murph Bhat who is about 38 weeks pregnant shared the protocol for an upcoming in-person prenatal appointment for an ultrasound at Alta Bates in Berkeley and described the unusual circumstances.

Bhat said she and her husband were told to drive to the hospital and park in the parking lot and begin the process from the car with a phone appointment. She would then go into the hospital alone for the procedure.

"They told us, 'Only you can come in,'" Bhat said. "You can’t touch anyone or interact with anyone on your way. Come directly into the room. You will only interact with the doctor."

Hospitals are allowing two parents to the first newborn visit, but after the initial meeting with the pediatrician, only one parent is allowed.

:::

Pregnancy for women is often a time of connecting and bonding with other women and couples through group activities, such as prenatal yoga and breast-feeding and birthing classes. Today, these things aren't being done in person and instead are happening online, or not at all.

Bhat said she knows one other person who is pregnant, but hasn't sought connection with other expecting moms online, nor taken part in regular virtual yoga. She is spending a lot of her time at home working. "I'm still working from home, so why use up that maternity leave if I don’t have to commute?" she said.

Many pregnant women aren't regularly stepping outside for walks or to grocery shop due to the risk of catching the virus. While studies don't show that pregnant women are at a higher risk for severe disease, parents who become infected near the time of birth may be separated from their new babies for up to 14 days.

To protect herself, Smith is mostly staying inside and using Instacart for groceries and recently bought a treadmill for exercise. She lives in a high-rise and simply riding the elevator can be terrifying as it puts you in a close situation with others. Smith is healthy, but like most pregnant women right now, isolated.

"The weirdest thing is growing this bump by yourself," Smith says. "Nobody sees you. I see my face in the mirror at home, but that's it. I went outside, and I don’t go outside too much, and I saw my reflection and saw my belly, and it was like, 'Wow, I'm pregnant.'"

Smith said that she hadn't planned to share details of her pregnancy on Facebook but finally posted something as a way to connect.

"I wanted to keep it private but I realized people don’t even know I’m pregnant," said Smith, joking that when this is all over, she might bump into a friend who would be completely confused by why she's carrying a baby.

:::

Nikki Sherin of San Francisco was scheduled to be induced on March 16, the day Mayor London Breed issued the stay-at-home order.

Sherin called the hospital that morning at 5:30 to find out what time to go in.

"I called, and they said call at 9 a.m.," she said. "I called at 9 a.m., and they said to call at 10:30 a.m. I called at 10:30 a.m., and the nurse was like, 'Honey, you don’t want to be here right now. It was the morning the no-visitor policy got released and she said, 'You’re not allowed to have your spouse here because of the new policy.'"

Sherin later talked to her doctor who said the situation was changing by the hour and the latest information was that her husband could be at the birth, but nobody else.

Two days later, she was induced. When she and her husband arrived at the hospital, they were screened at the door and then walked through empty hallways to labor and delivery. "We didn’t see a soul," she said.

Laboring women, often walk hospital hallways to help speed up the birthing process, but Sherin said she was confined to her room. She never saw any other patients during her visit.

This was Sherin's second child and with her first, family join her at the hospital.

"I had my mom and mother-in law-in my room with my husband and then my dads were in the waiting room," she said. "It was a big family affair. My daughter was the first granddaughter on both sides and then this is the first grandson. The plan was to have at least my mom in there. But I could have only my husband. I think my mom was more disappointed. The second time around it felt more intimate having just me and my husband there. Though we later realized we had no photos because there was no one there to help. You just have to readjust all your expectations."

Dr. Irani said at UCSF she's seeing many pregnant women adjust to the new restrictions around visitors by using technology. Women are receiving support from their doulas during delivery through digital devices. "We’ve definitely had doulas on Facetime the whole time," she said. "They’ve offered fantastic support even if it’s virtual. We welcome them to be a part of the experience virtually."

She has also seen new parents bring their families into the delivery rooms with screens.

"I was in one room and I was nearly brought to tears because they had four phones out with all the grandparents and other family," said Dr. Irani. "There was someone in New Jersey and someone in New York. Her husband was managing all the devices. While the birth experience wasn’t their first choice, I know they still felt the love of their families."

Dr. Irani added, "We recognize it is so hard for moms and families right now. We’re doing our best to make it a positive experience."

Amy Graff is a digital editor with SFGATE. Email her: agraff@sfgate.com.

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

Sign up for 'The Daily' newsletter for the latest on coronavirus here.