Here are the places where you can still buy disposable gloves

You can still find disposable gloves at certain retailers. (Photo: Reviewed / Betsey Goldwasser)

— Recommendations are independently chosen by Reviewed’s editors. Purchases you make through our links may earn us a commission.

When shopping for groceries or just going for a walk, you may be wondering how to limit your potential exposure to the coronavirus. While the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is recommending the voluntary use of face masks in public to prevent the spread of coronavirus, you may also want to use disposable gloves to protect yourself from the disease. According to the CDC, these handy tools can be useful for when removing packages or trash that were handled by someone who has been infected with COVID-19.

But like other household essentials, such as hand sanitizer and toilet paper, disposable gloves are becoming harder and harder to find in stores and online. Thankfully, there are still a few options available.

While the Venom Steel Rip Resistant Industrial Gloves that we rated to be the best on the market for comfort and durability when testing disposable gloves are currently out of stock, there are plenty of other pairs still for sale that are great for trips to the grocery store and other essential errands.

We've tracked down a list of places you can find them and will continue to update it as stock changes. Note: This isn't a time to be hoarding gloves, since many essential workers need these products as well to do their jobs while staying safe, so keep that in mind before you make your purchase.

Need help finding products? Sign up for our weekly newsletter. It’s free and you can unsubscribe at any time.

Where to buy disposable gloves

Home Depot

Walmart

Office Depot

Staples

How to use disposable gloves

The World Health Organization (WHO) says to wash your hands before donning disposable gloves. While wearing gloves, remember not to touch your face or eyes, as this will defeat the purpose of wearing them.

To remove your gloves, it's essential not to touch the gloves with your bare hands, according to the CDC. In order to do so, pull one glove off by peeling it from the wrist and then remove the other glove by reaching up underneath it and pulling it off. After you have disposed of your gloves, wash your hands with soap and water or use hand sanitizer.

The product experts at Reviewed have all your shopping needs covered. Follow Reviewed on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram for the latest deals, reviews, and more.

Prices were accurate at the time this article was published but may change over time.

Read or Share this story: https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/reviewedcom/2020/04/06/covid-19-where-you-can-still-buy-disposable-gloves/2954623001/