CLOSE

The Maricopa County jail population has decreased and fewer people are being booked, all as part of efforts to prevent the spread of the coronavirus, Sheriff Paul Penzone announced Thursday.

At a news conference, the sheriff detailed what his deputies and detention officers are facing and doing.

So far, only one employee has tested positive for the virus and that person has recovered, Penzone said. No inmates have tested positive, he said.

But, 21 inmates are on medical observation because they are showing symptoms of the virus, he said.

Three in the Estrella jail.

One in the Fourth Avenue jail.

17 in the Lower Buckeye jail.

Penzone said he didn't know how many of those inmates have been tested for COVID-19. But he acknowledged testing is limited in the jails.

He said MCSO detention officers and inmates are receiving N95 masks and surgical masks, respectively, but supplies are low.

As a public service, The Arizona Republic is offering coronavirus coverage relating to public safety free of charge. Support The Republic by subscribing to azcentral.com.

Citing restaurant violators, drivers

Penzone said his deputies have cited at least one restaurant for violating Gov. Doug Ducey's orders to only offer takeout or delivery service.

He did not name the restaurant, but said it was out of Fountain Hills.

He also said deputies are changing how they do some traffic stops.

When a deputy pulls someone over, the deputy will hold out a plastic bag and ask the driver to drop his or her license in it, Penzone said. The deputy will then run the information they need and if the driver needs to be cited, the deputy will put the traffic citation inside the plastic bag for the driver to remove, he said.

As far as crime and 911 calls, he said the numbers have remained about the same compared to the same three months last year. Still, he said, the challenges the coronavirus has presented people, such as job loss, could have an impact on crime down the road.

"My fear is just over time," he said. "Depending on when this comes to conclusion, anxiety is a growing force, as is depression and the impact on you economically."

Jail population

Since January, the jail population in Maricopa County has been reduced by 22%. Deputies have been asked to cite people for non-violent crimes rather than arrest them, the sheriff said.

In January, there were approximately 7,100 inmates. As of Thursday, that number had come down to 5,550, according to a slideshow presentation the sheriff provided.

The presentation also stated the average daily bookings into jail had declined 100 per day, from the more typical 300.

Penzone has previously announced that he temporarily suspended work furlough and work release programs, allowing some inmates to serve their time from home instead. This way, he had said, it would prevent people coming in and out of the jail.

The Adult Probation Department determines a person's eligibility to participate in the work furlough program. The work-release program is court-ordered and inmates are only incarcerated during the hours and days on a confinement order.

People in the programs have been convicted of nonviolent crimes such as driving under the influence, solicitation and fraud. Many have shorter sentences.

Masks for inmates, MCSO employees

Each inmate has received a surgical mask. If they need another one, detention officers would provide them. But, Penzone added, he wants inmates to be responsible and take care of their masks because they are limited.

On March 24, his office received 50,000 surgical masks, 27,000 of which have been distributed. Another shipment of 75,000 is expected to be delivered this week, according to the presentation.

As far as the N95 masks, which is what first-responders are recommended to wear, his office received an order of 10,000 on March 25. So far, 8,000 have been distributed to deputies and MCSO employees. They expect another shipment next week.

Penzone said he has also contacted a third-party golf apparel company in Virginia that has started making cloth masks that he hopes his office can purchase and use if the next N95 mask shipment doesn't come in.

He also said inmates are being provided with soap and hand sanitizer for personal hygiene. And crews are cleaning inmates' cells once a week, he said.

Fountain Hills business cited

Penzone said that so far his deputies have had to cite one restaurant-bar establishment for allowing customers to gather inside.

He did not name the business, recommending reporters file a public records request for that information. The Arizona Republic has submitted that request.

The deputies cited the restaurant only after being called more than once to the business, Penzone said. Deputies prefer to educate and convince business owners to follow Ducey's essential-services and stay-at-home orders, the sheriff said.

People or business owners violating Ducey's orders can be cited for a class-one misdemeanor and fined up to $2,500.

Penzone urged business owners to follow Ducey's orders because their actions can help reduce the spread of the virus, he said.

"For the individuals who have refused to abide by the governor’s directives, it’s not just affecting you, it is affecting the quality of life of those who are putting their lives on the line," the sheriff said. "That is, quite frankly, selfish and unacceptable."

Uriel Garcia covers public-safety issues in Arizona. Reach him at uriel.garcia@azcentral.com. Follow him on Twitter @ujohnnyg.

Support local journalism. Subscribe to azcentral.com today.

Read or Share this story: https://www.azcentral.com/story/news/local/phoenix/2020/04/16/maricopa-county-jailing-fewer-people-during-coronavirus-pandemic-sheriff-paul-penzone-says/5149399002/