President Trump’s campaign wasted no time putting on the brass knuckles for Joseph R. Biden this week once Sen. Bernard Sanders exited the 2020 election ring.

An ad uploaded to YouTube Thursday titled “Biden Stands Up For China” offers a three-pronged attack on the former vice president involving accusations of nepotism and cronyism, his reaction to the coronavirus pandemic and concerns about his mental health.

“During America’s crisis, Biden protected China’s feelings,” accompanying text reads during the 60-second spot. “Biden stands up for China while China cripples America.”

Audio of Mr. Biden referring to Mr. Trump’s “hysterical xenophobia” is juxtaposed with newspaper clippings of the Democrat’s opposition to Mr. Trump’s travel ban.

Mr. Trump declared coronavirus a public health emergency on Jan. 31 while slapping travel restrictions on China.

“It’s positively brutal [for Mr. Biden],” writer Ed Morrissey of the conservative website Hotair responded Friday while citing a Harris poll on the pandemic. “‘The only demo not to have 75% or more [of respondents] blaming China is Democrats, who still split 67/33. And, for the record, majorities in each wave of this poll support Donald Trump calling it the ‘Chinese virus,’ with the latest wave (4/3-5) the biggest at 58/42.’”

The ad also spotlights the business dealings of Mr. Biden’s son Hunter regarding the private equity firm Rosemont Seneca Partners.

The New York Post noted in October 2019 that Rosemont Seneca Partners “became a partner in a new investment company backed by the state-owned Bank of China. Christening the new firm Bohai Harvest RST (BHR), the partners set out to raise $1 billion for the new fund.”

Mr. Morrissey predicted that “Team Trump will beat Biden like a drum over this all year long — and if they don’t, it will the worst case of political malpractice since, er, Hillary Clinton forgot Wisconsin existed.”

Sign up for Daily Newsletters Manage Newsletters

Copyright © 2020 The Washington Times, LLC. Click here for reprint permission.