Rhythwyn Evans inspired by Capt Tom Moore, 99, who walked 100 lengths of his garden

Welsh farmer doing 91 laps of his bungalow on 91st birthday for NHS

A 91-year-old Welsh farmer has raised thousands of pounds for NHS charities by pledging to walk 91 laps around the exterior of his bungalow, citing Capt Tom Moore as his inspiration.

Rhythwyn Evans had completed 21 laps of the property, on Tan-y-Graig Farm, in Silian, Ceredigion, before breakfast on Saturday – his 91st birthday.

The grandfather, who uses a walking stick, has already raised more than £12,000 for his local health board charity.

Evans said he had lived to a “ripe old age” and wanted “to give something back to the community”.

Evans began the challenge in solidarity with Capt Tom Moore, who has raised more than £23m so far for NHS Charities Together by walking laps of his garden to mark his 100th birthday.

On a JustGiving page, Evans’s family said he had celebrated his 90th birthday with family, neighbours and friends, but wanted to do something different to give something back to the community during the coronavirus crisis.

“Inspired by and in solidarity with Capt Tom Moore, he has set a personal challenge to walk around his home 91 times in one day, to help beat the Covid-19 epidemic,” they wrote.

“Rhythwyn would like to support his local health board, Hywel Dda, to show his gratitude for the outstanding work of the workers in these extremely challenging times.”

Money raised by the nonagenarian will go to the Hywel Dda NHS Covid-19 appeal, organised by Hywel Dda Health Charities.

Evans has already smashed his original target of £1,000.

Sarah Jennings, the director of partnerships and corporate services for Hywel Dda University health board, said they were “extremely grateful” for his support.

“This is such an incredible thing to do to celebrate a special birthday and we thank Mr Evans and his supporters for helping to fund vital items urgently needed for the welfare and wellbeing of staff and volunteers,” she said. “Penblwydd Hapus (Happy Birthday) from all at Hywel Dda.”