Already known for her pro-Trump dresses, singer Joy Villa wore a custom-made gown Monday night for the premiere of the pro-life move "Unplanned" emblazoned with the words "F--- Planned Parenthood."

In February, Villa wore a gown hand-painted with the phrase "Build the Wall" and sported a red purse that read "Make America Great Again."

"Unplanned" tells the story of the political and spiritual transformation of former Planned Parenthood clinic director Abby Johnson.

"I told Johnson I wanted to do a custom dress for the premiere because I wanted her to be in on it, because this is her film, her story, it’s very personal. She wrote it and produced it. So we came up with some options," Villa told the Hollywood Reporter.

TRENDING: Obama AG Eric Holder giddy about 'opportunity' coronavirus presents to make 'permanent' changes

"She went on to make an offhand remark and said, 'or we could always do 'F--- Planned Parenthood,'" Villa added. "It's controversial enough to get people's attention and it also is the underlying message of the film."

Villa's gown was custom-made by Desi Lee Allinger-Nelson of Orange County-based Desi Designs Couture, the Reporter said.

The actress said "abortion is not health care and Planned Parenthood has been pushing that and indoctrinating girls with pink and girliness."

"So that's why my dress is hot pink and very girly."

The Hollywood Reporter noted that leaders in the Christian community and in Hollywood have criticized the MPAA ratings board for giving the film an R rating.

The film has no profanity or violence, but the MPAA rated it R for "objectionable" scenes involving abortion.

Villa told Newsweek she knew she would get "a lot of flack" for the dress.

"I'm not really scared anymore," Villa said. "I've been tagging Planned Parenthood in posts exposing their murder ways and what they're doing, being very vocal. But it does make me a target."

She said she needs a security detail when she goes out.

"I always have people around me. But the freedom experience of being able to be truly me and a beacon of hope for so many who can’t speak up is worth it," she said.

"This is who I am and this is also what I'm known for. People are looking to me to be that person," Villa added. "I'm a minority in this scene. When I go to the Grammys or any red carpet event (even a conservative one), I'm still a minority because there's not many Afro-Latinas who are pro-Trump, outspoken artists actually working [and] living in Hollywood who are going to wear something outlandish, sexy [and] something beautiful with a message."