Music after the pandemic: How a 50-year-old Mission recording studio weathers the storm

Different Fur Studios in the Mission is closed due to the shelter-in-place ordinance, but raising funds by offering pre-purchases of studio time at a nearly 50% discount. Different Fur Studios in the Mission is closed due to the shelter-in-place ordinance, but raising funds by offering pre-purchases of studio time at a nearly 50% discount. Photo: Amy Lombard Photo: Amy Lombard Image 1 of / 11 Caption Close Music after the pandemic: How a 50-year-old Mission recording studio weathers the storm 1 / 11 Back to Gallery

Even though most people will never enter a recording studio, the music created in them provides a product that many consider not just essential, but life changing.

Different Fur is one of those studios, a 50-year-old Mission institution that has hosted everyone from Stevie Wonder to Lil’ Wayne. Over the years, it has evolved, turning one of the two studio rooms into a headquarters for Text Me Records, but its main revenue stream comes from renting out recording time in the same studio that David Byrne and Brian Eno recorded “My Life in the Bush of Ghosts” in 1981.

The studio closed shop a few days before the official shelter-in-place ordinance, leading to a huge loss of business, like other San Francisco institutions ranging from vintage drive-thrus to cocktail bars.

“It was rough. We had to cancel basically a couple months of sessions,” said owner Patrick Brown. “We all basically work paycheck to paycheck, and those paychecks come when people book us. So all of our income is based on those bookings. If we have to cancel them, it basically just shuts us down.”

The shutdown causes unique challenges for a recording studio, because the financial hardship hits not just their staff, but their clientele.

“I think the big difference between us and a bar is that if a bar can survive the downtime, then as soon as they can open the doors and serve alcohol, people will be there to drink,” Brown said. “With us, musicians are hit so hard, they won’t have much income to turn around and spend on things like this.”

RELATED: This Bay Area town has started weekly porch concerts to boost morale

To counteract the ripple effects of the shutdown within the music industry and put some money in the pockets of their engineers, Different Fur is offering local musicians a hell of a deal: It has discounted its rates by nearly 50%.

In addition to an old-fashioned sale, Different Fur is implementing video technology to bring its recording expertise to a wider audience. DF house engineer Lien Do hosts experimental music production workshops on Twitch twice a week. The rest of the engineering team has taken on remote mixing and production jobs. And Text Me Records soldiers on, with Brown helping hip-hop artist Ricky Lake put the finishing touches on his next album (Brown lives upstairs, so still has access to the studio). It has even remotely sourced footage for the next Ricky Lake video.

The pandemic has also led Brown to return to his roots, micro-managing the studio. He started at Different Fur in 2004 as an intern, then became the studio’s fourth owner in 2007. At that point, he worked as a jack of all trades, serving as studio manager, main engineer and a producer. A decade later, he stepped back from day-to-day operations to start Text Me in the upstairs studio, forming a collective of like-minded hip-hop songwriters to collaborate on projects, with an emphasis on navigating the more lucrative publishing side of the business that many artists neglect.

“I was kind of burnt out on engineering and running the studio all at once. I wanted to try to find a way to create more long-term money for musicians and artists,” Brown said. “Initially, we were using any open unbooked studio time as basically free time for the [Text Me] songwriters and producers.”

RELATED: What it’s like being Earl ‘The Pearl’ Stevens, aka iconic Bay Area rapper E-40’s dad

There was a loose plan for him to return to his old role as studio manager this year, but the shelter-in-place ordinance immediately thrust him back into his old role.

“It’s a little reinvigorating in a way, because I’m stepping back to something I haven’t done in a while. It’s giving me a different view of everything, and making me reassess what is important.”

Thankfully, Brown considers himself and the studio lucky compared to many other local institutions, as he owns the building, so he doesn’t have to deal with snowballing rent, but still needs to rely on financial assistance from the SBA Disaster Loan program. Overall, he feels most concerned about the ripple effects throughout his staff and the greater local music ecosystem.

“For me, it’s about maintaining the legacy of the place and making sure the people who work here can survive.”

Dan Gentile is a digital editor at SFGATE. Email: Dan.Gentile@sfgate.com | Twitter: @Dannosphere