Patrick Williams remembers a recurring promise between himself and former star running back Reggie Cole. One day, Cole would return to coach and be Williams’ defensive coordinator.

Williams reflected on that pact on Saturday night, just a day after Cole died on Friday. He died via a gunshot wound to the head, per the medical report from Tarrant County. No foul play is suspected in his death.

His 22nd birthday is on Monday. Memorial services have yet to be scheduled.

“It’s been tough," Williams said. "Reggie was like a son to me. A great kid, very humble, worked hard. Was one of the top academic students, as well as football players.”

Cole walked on at TCU, and played in one game for the Horned Frogs in 2018. He was a running back and safety at Dallas Carter, and was a two-time All-District player. He was voted as the team’s most valuable player in his final two seasons. He also player track & field and tennis at Dallas Carter.

Williams said he went to be with Cole’s father on Friday night. The coach and the family reminisced on “the good old days.”

“I know the family, and they trusted me with Reggie," Williams said. "I’ve been over there several times, and have a real good relationship with his dad. ... It was just, just the thought of not seeing Reggie again. That was the tough part about it.”

Carter head coach Patrick Williams Sr. (Tom Fox/The Dallas Morning News) (Tom Fox / Staff Photographer)

Williams, who has since left Dallas Carter High School, remembered when Cole first got to Carter, that his father told the coach he really wanted someone that would care for his son and look out for him. That’s how Williams became so close to Reggie. He always was trying to learn more about the offense, and how to be a leader, Williams said.

“He was always around, always wanting to learn more,” Williams said. "He was always working on his craft. He just developed to be a great young man. He was a leader around the school. All the teachers loved him. All the coaches loved him.

“He’s just an awesome kid.”

Find more high school sports stories from The Dallas Morning News here.