What should you do if a member of your household gets COVID-19?

Creating a safe situation in a household with one or multiple infected patients is tricky, so it's helpful to plan ahead and prepare for sickness. Creating a safe situation in a household with one or multiple infected patients is tricky, so it's helpful to plan ahead and prepare for sickness. Photo: Richard Drury/Getty Images Photo: Richard Drury/Getty Images Image 1 of / 33 Caption Close What should you do if a member of your household gets COVID-19? 1 / 33 Back to Gallery

For more coverage, visit our complete coronavirus section here.

If someone in your household shows symptoms of COVID-19, which most commonly include fever, a dry cough and shortness of breath, calling your doctor is the the first thing to do.

A health care professional will offer tips on how to care for the patient and help you decide whether they need to be seen in person. You will also be given instructions on how to protect others in the household and told to separate the patient as much as possible.

Creating a safe situation in a household with one or multiple infected patients is tricky, so it's helpful to plan ahead and prepare for sickness. Here's what health care professionals advise.

Choose a room in your house that can be used to separate sick household members from others

"Somebody that has coronavirus needs to be isolated," said Dr. George Rutherford, an epidemiologist and director of UCSF's Prevention and Public Health Group. "Put them in a room and shut the door. They shouldn’t come to meals. They need their own bathroom. There are real consequences to this disease."

Rutherford added that if someone is infected in a household with limited space and bathrooms, some members could separate in a hotel room.

Trent Rhorer, executive director of S.F.'s Human Service Agency, said the city is working with hotels. "We have hotel rooms for individuals who need to quarantine or isolate due to COVID and who do not have housing suitable for self-quarantine," Rhorer wrote in an email. "We are taking referrals from the health care system."

Dr. John Swartzberg, a professor of infectious disease at UC Berkeley, recognized that not everyone living in small homes will be able to afford to separate household members by paying for a hotel room, but if any uninfected individuals are elderly or have underlying health conditions, "they should move out" if at all possible to protect themselves from contracting the virus.

Dr. Anne Liu, a clinical associated professor of infectious diseases at Stanford, said she has some patients who have been able to use friends' empty homes for quarantine.

The reality, though, is that many households with infected patients will need to remain in their homes with only one bathroom. In this case, "cleaning is going to be super important," said Liu.

After a patient uses the shared bathroom, they need to clean the premises thoroughly; a window can also be opened for ventilation. "Obviously there are some elderly people who have limited availability to do that," Liu said.

"You can see that the bulk of families in our society will not adequately be able to protect themselves if someone in the family has COVID-19," Swartzberg concluded, when considering the difficulty in households moving out family members or creating a situation with separate bathrooms or where a shared bathroom is adequately cleaned.

Make the infected person eat meals in his or her room

Liu advised against the infected patient doing any food preparation or using the kitchen, if possible. Ideally, other members of the household cook meals or order takeout.

"They can drop food outside the door of where the other person is spending their time and then leave the food there and walk away before the person comes out and takes it, so there's no contact," Liu said.

Liu said some of her patients living in a home with COVID-19 are serving food to the infected person with disposable utensils and plates.

"Keep meals simple," she said. "You don’t need a tray with a half dozen plates on it."

Stock up on the right cleaning products

"Bleach is good for cleaning," Liu said. "Anything with over 70 percent alcohol."

She added that the Centers for Disease Control has instructions for cleaning; recommended products on its website can be consulted.

Create a hand-washing schedule

In light of coronavirus, many individuals have quickly picked up on the need to wash hands any time you leave and reenter your household. But if you have an infected person living in your home — even in an entirely separate room — you need to be constantly washing your hands at home, ideally at least once an hour, or even more.

"Have a schedule and have everyone wash their hands at the top of the hour," she said. "Or make it a game."

Members of the household should also be trained to not touch their faces.

Use masks and gloves in the home

"Ideally in a world where we had unlimited PPE [personal protective equipment], everyone should wear a mask," said Liu. "But if the household members are all staying far apart and not coming into one another’s spaces, masks aren’t as important. If people are sharing space together and sharing some air, it’s more important that they wear a mask. A surgical mask is probably a good step to reducing transmission and the difference between a surgical mask and N95 mask is a narrow one, we think."

Gloves should be used when handling the laundry of someone who is infected. "Wash your hands after removing the gloves," Liu advised.

Check in with your doctor about how long to keep household members and these extreme measures in place.

Amy Graff is a digital editor with SFGATE. Email her: agraff@sfgate.com.

MORE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE:

Sign up for 'The Daily' newsletter for the latest on coronavirus here.