SF after dark: what will the city’s nightlife look like when it’s turned back on? 14 industry veterans discuss the future of dance clubs

San Francisco's DJ culture is a cornerstone of the city's nightlife, but can it survive a pandemic? San Francisco's DJ culture is a cornerstone of the city's nightlife, but can it survive a pandemic? Photo: Corey Adams Photo: Corey Adams Image 1 of / 9 Caption Close SF after dark: what will the city’s nightlife look like when it’s turned back on? 1 / 9 Back to Gallery

Every Tuesday you can find Primo Pitino in the DJ booth at the Makeout Room playing soul 45s for Slow Jams night behind a sign that reads “no requests.” Now under the shelter-in-place ordinance due to coronavirus, the veteran SF DJ of 17 years spends his Tuesdays at home – playing those same records via livestream. The sweaty dance floor is now his bedroom, shrouded in purple light and a fog machine, walls lined with shelves of vinyl records that don’t have anywhere to go except to his turntables.

San Francisco has an incredible legacy of dance music, from the riotous disco of Sylvester to hip-shaking house of Dirtybird Records to the dungeon techno of Dark Entries, but its future is under threat. Clubs are closed indefinitely and the news gets more dire by the day, with Governor Gavin Newsom recently announcing large gatherings likely won’t happen until a vaccine is announced. Full-time DJs like Primo struggle with filing for unemployment, existing in a weird middle ground between the service and entertainment industries.



“Where do you put someone like a DJ on the artist spectrum?” says Primo, who is waiting to hear about his unemployment status. “I think some people look at us as a bartender practically, some people think you’re some sort of auteur. Or some people look at you as a promoter slash hypeman. The truth is probably somewhere in the middle. I think of it as an art form, but it’s a sticky place to describe…”



That nebulous area between concert venue, bar and just a place to hangout doesn’t meet the city’s standard of “essential businesses,” but clubs still serve as vital city institutions.



“It’s not just about concerts, it’s about culture as a whole. Culture is about bringing people together. Music is the thing that brings people from all different backgrounds. It creates community. We need to not just save music, we need to save it all,” says Noah Bennett, who performs as DJ Dials and books events at 1015 Folsom, as well as partnering with Goldenvoice and Another Planet.



Facing an uncertain future, an industry that already operates on razor-slim margins is naturally very concerned.



“It’s week to week cash flow,” says Chris Smith, CEO of Monarch Management Group, who runs Monarch in SoMa and The Great Northern in the Mission, two venues that regularly host international touring DJs. “There’s no nest egg here that we can dip into, there’s no contingency plan. We have business insurance, but the insurance companies aren’t taking claims on this.”



The San Francisco Entertainment Commission, which regulates over 1,000 businesses, is currently in fact-finding mode to discern how best to help keep the industry afloat. “There’s no one-size-fits-all approach. Each club is it’s own thing and has its own set of issues,” says Ben Bleiman, president of the commission and partner in bars like Tonic and Soda Popinski’s. “I think everything should be on the table, from advocating for more grant money to finding creative forms of debt, even though I’m personally not a fan of the debt option.”

While clubs scramble for grant money and loans, their top immediate priority is supporting their staffs. Clubs in the city are keeping as many employees as possible, while starting crowdfunding campaigns to give some assistance. Between Public Works, Monarch, 1015 Folsom and The Stud, they’ve raised over $50,000.



“Our job in the meantime is just making sure we take care of the people who have been with us and have been loyal and deserve everything,” says Matt Feldberg, marketing director of 1015 Folsom.



The sad reality is that the entire industry is currently in jeopardy.



“Everyone is in the same boat and dealing with the same issues,” says Marco De la Vega, venue director of one of the city's biggest dance venues, Public Works. “On the agency level and the artist level and the management level and the venue level and the independent promoter level, everyone is having to deal with the same s—.”

RELATED: Music after the pandemic: How a 50-year-old Mission recording studio weathers the storm



Open for over 50 years, the legacy-status queer bar The Stud is in a unique position based on their co-op business model, with the team of 17 owners chipping in to carry the burden of tasks like grant and loan applications. Their space is much smaller than most of the clubs above, but in a way, that makes it even more of a challenge.

“We’re this small bar that opens to people that don’t have any money. Our drinks are the cheapest, our door prices are the cheapest,” says co-owner Marke Bieschke. “A lot of our audiences are queer people or gender non-binary people who were forced to move out of town. It’s a dilemma being the bar that holds space for people who have no money, while trying to survive in the most expensive city in the world.”

Last night a DJ still saved my life

Despite the doom and gloom, club culture is already adapting. Global online dance music brands are mobilizing, with download hub Beatport raising $185,000 for COVID-19-related charities via their Reconnect event featuring headliners like Rüfüs du Sol and Nina Kraviz. Streaming site Boiler Room has broadcast “isolation sets” that have drawn millions of viewers, with 350,000 alone watching Four Tet playing in a surprisingly messy home studio. Virtual raves have popped up via Zoom, with attendees actually willing to pay a cover charge. Bay Area promoters Noise Pop, more traditionally focused on live music, have also flirted with the idea.

“Perhaps we might even throw a Zoom rave for kicks? Sounds silly, I know, but it's the little things like cyber dance parties online that can in fact bring heaps of joy in these weird and depressing times,” says Noise Pop talent buyer James Lopez, who is also running a crowdfunding campaign for employees.

DJs like Primo encourage donations via Venmo on their personal streams, which initially earned him about 40% of a typical DJ fee, but has since slowed to 10-20%. Enough to pay for groceries, but not a sustainable wage.

Oakland-based Fault Radio, a non-profit that streams pop-up DJ sets at local businesses, has gone into high gear helping DJs create professional-looking content distributed daily via Twitch. On April 20, they’re hosting Clouds in the Distance in coordination with Public Works, a mini festival that aims to unite DJs from across the local scene (and naturally, celebrate cannabis). They’re also expanding into new projects, ranging from a compilation of local music made under quarantine to live meditation sessions scored by ambient musicians, but streaming DJ sets are still the heart of the operation.

“Our biggest asset is that we can teach people how to stream, and keep things going on a community level, working with people collectively,” says Dundee Maghen, Fault co-founder.



Her co-founder Dor Wand stresses that although DJs are used to performing live, many don’t have experience broadcasting from home.



“It’s a new format for a lot of people. There’s a lot of people doing it for the first time, so there’s no quality control. We can provide all the support, teach people what to do, and basically take over their computer,” says Wand.

RELATED: Tupac, Ghostbusters, and a $1200 funk record: This is the untold story of Kirk Crumpler



One of those streaming newcomers is Steve Fabus, a legendary San Francisco disco DJ who has played in clubs since 1975. “My philosophy of DJing is that I always want to present the current version of myself, bringing all the history into it, but creating something new,” says Fabus. “It’s a learning curve with a lot of us.” He recently performed at a virtual afternoon party called Quaran-Tea Dance, hosted by The Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence to benefit the SF Queer Nightlife Fund, which has already raised over $130,000.



Although the closing of clubs due to the coronavirus is truly unprecedented, Bay Area DJ culture has faced hardships before. The tragic fire at the Ghost Ship warehouse in Oakland in 2016 resulted in 36 deaths and led to the shuttering of many DIY venues. And back even further, as AIDS swept across the community in the ‘80s and ‘90s, institutions like Trocadero Transfer closed for years as dancers weathered the storm.



“People went through a period of mourning, and worry and fear, and a lot of people stopped going out,” says Fabus, but he recounts that the community came back stronger. “They just wanted to be together, they wanted that joy of being in the club and having their church back basically. Having that joy that they would feel on the dance floor, that they had missed.”



Another old school disco DJ-turned-radio broadcaster, Lester Temple, stressed that the AIDS crisis made him reconsider what dance music meant to him.



“There are some similarities. There’s a social crisis. People stopped going out and reassessed if they would get back into a situation where the party started again. It was a full-on raging party before AIDS. But it did come back,” says Temple.

Over and over

The real question on the minds of the nightlife industry right now, beyond how they’ll stay solvent, is what that culture will look like when it does return. If there’s one thing for certain, it’s that the community will persevere through this together.



“Everyone’s kind of realizing that it used to be a dog-eat-dog world, but that everybody needs each other to survive,” says Feldberg of 1015 Folsom. “These DJs don’t have a venue to play, how are they going to make money? The hope I think in dance music especially is that there’s a newfound sense of respect and less attitude, and more community.”



Festivals will likely be the last type of events to return, which will create ripple effects throughout the industry, as many international headliners perform at clubs like Public Works while touring through the US. When the doors do re-open, expect a flood of shows. Venues like 1015 Folsom anticipate hosting both early and late events to accommodate rescheduled bookings and recoup revenue.

Still, the question remains as to how reopening the clubs will look. Whereas the restaurant industry anticipates a slow return to form, with strict limits on occupancy to accommodate social distancing, that’s not a possibility when it comes to dance clubs, many of which already stretch the limits of their capacity.



“The magic of our space is that people are packed in like sardines,” says Rachel Ryan, current general manager of the Stud. ”Everyone’s covered in each other’s sweat and throwing money at drag queens or dancing to disco at 3 o’clock in the morning. Even the idea of a partial reboot, of opening businesses back up but having to carefully monitor numbers, that is not a promising business model for us.”



Once smaller clubs can reopen, some promoters see it as an opportunity to return to the culture’s underground roots.



“One thing I really want to see is that classic club experience,” says Bennett. “No LEDs, no fireworks, no big production. I want to see a pitch dark room with big basslines and people closing their eyes because they’re in such ecstasy with the music. That may be achieved now, because we may not get those headliners in town.”



Upstart promoters like Liam Hausmann, who DJs under the name Wily and throws DIY parties in Golden Gate Park with Thump Therapy, thinks that even younger fans will emerge from this cautiously and that a return to form won’t happen in 2020.



“I know there’s a lot of cavalier attitude among young people, especially in Facebook communities that are enthusiastic about the music scene,” says Hausmann, who cites a recent illegally operating club in Bayview as an example of irresponsible behavior. “But a lot of people, no matter how young and fit they are, are going to lose people to the virus.”



Hausmann also thinks the shift to streaming won’t end once shelter-in-place has passed.



“All these people who are by nature entertainers and forced into digital platforms will stay there,” says Hausmann. “I think a lot of people will continue to do streaming, but you’ll see a lot of really amazing streaming start once people have more freedom to move around and produce more elaborate visual products.”



In addition to raising the bar on production, the lack of a present audience also encourages DJs to take bigger risks and offers a greater degree of freedom.



“It takes out an element of conservatism of picking your music,” says DJ Lester Temple. “If you do a mix, and people dig it and scream and yell, there’s a rush there. But you always have to worry about bodies on the dance floor, and if they’re feeling it. That’s all completely removed when you don’t have a dance floor to worry about.”



It’s also a chance to attract new audiences.



“I felt like I got to travel just by coming to my own DJ party,” says Primo. “I would meet people from all over the place, and different cultures and ways of life. This is maybe a chance to try to bridge online boundaries, or let’s say, online moats that exist between people.”



And although a live stream from a living room will likely never recreate the experience of moving in tandem alongside a thousand other people, watching Primo on Twitch still feels like a party, with over 400 viewers logging in. Online he flails himself around his bedroom, just as if he was performing at his regular parties, Slow Jams at Makeout Room and Club Lonely at OMG. On this week’s stream, he played the music so loud that it literally led the neighbors to call in a noise complaint to the police.



So in a sense, the spirit of dance music isn’t going anywhere.



“When you’re having a bad day, we’re here for you,” says Noah Bennett. “And when you’re having a good day, we’re here for you, too. We’re here to enrich and make your life f---ing interesting.”

Dan Gentile is a digital editor at SFGATE. Email: Dan.Gentile@sfgate.com | Twitter: @Dannosphere