More than 85 percent of the Muslim prison chaplains in Germany recently were terminated.

It seems they were actually agents of the Turkish government, according to a Gatestone Institute report.

Now, Patrick Dunleavy reports at the Investigative Project on Terror that it's just one example of the troubles that occur when Muslim prison chaplains are not adequately vetted.

"Those clerics [in Germany] had to be terminated after the Turkish government refused to have them go through security checks, which are required by German law for all prison chaplains," IPT reported. "And while the number of foreign-born inmates in German prisons has spiked to nearly 50 percent, the vast majority of those are from Poland, Tunisia, the Czech Republic, and Georgia, not Turkey.

TRENDING: Obama AG Eric Holder giddy about 'opportunity' coronavirus presents to make 'permanent' changes

"One wonders why the need for the 97 Turkish prison chaplains who were let go."

The nation now has 25 Muslim chaplains.

"Authorities both here and in the European Union have known for years the powerful influence a prison chaplain can have on an incarcerated individual," IPT reported. "The right chaplain can help the inmate on the path to rehabilitation and restoration of family ties. The wrong one can be like a wolf in sheep's clothing filling the inmate's mind with a radical ideology that pushes him or her down the road to jihad."

Dunleavy testified to Congress inmates also are radicalized by other belief systems; but for Muslims, the difference is foreign backing and financing.

"While investigating radical Islamic influences in prison, we found several indicators that contributed to the radicalization process. One was foreign born inmates who had already committed terrorist acts. Improperly vetted clergy also play a role, along with foreign funds that came to organizations like the North American Islamic Trust Fund, the Islamic Society of North America (ISNA), the Islamic Development Bank in Saudi Arabia and the Graduate School of Islamic Social Sciences (GSISS)," he said.

Some of those funds are used for literature in prison libraries that promote radical Islam.

In the U.S., the federal Bureau of Prisons hired Egyptian Muslim Fouad El Bayly as a prison chaplain even though he had called for the execution of for Muslim Ayaan Hirsi Ali,a renowned critic of Islam's subjugation of women.

Bayly said Ali "defamed the faith," and the "sentence is death."

Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, then asked for the names of groups working with the Bureau of Prisons for background checks. Among them were Islamic Society of North America, which was founded by the Muslim Brotherhood.

Other Muslims came to ISNA's defense, claiming it is "well-respected," the report said.

But Dunleavy, a senior fellow at IPT and former deputy inspector general for the New York State Department of Corrections, explained groups like ISNA promote Islamic supremacism, meaning they are working toward the replacement of the U.S. Constitution with Islamic law.

Zuhdi Jasser of the American Islamic Forum for Democracy said such groups are political and not merely religious.

Dunleavy wrote: "Organizations with this type of ideology should not be relied upon to certify potential prison chaplains. It only risks promoting radicalization among the inmates and destabilizing the already fragile prison environment."