Congress is out on recess this week. But three vulnerable GOP senators up for re-election in 2020 appear to be hiding from their constituents.

This week is a district work period for members of Congress — better known as a recess week, when lawmakers head home to meet with constituents and get a feel for what the voters who sent them to Capitol Hill want to see them work on in the nation's capital.

Yet three vulnerable Republican senators up for re-election in 2020, who just voted to ignore the Constitution and uphold Trump's fake national emergency, have no public events listed for constituents to attend, according to a review of senators' official websites, campaign websites and social media accounts.

They include Sen. Thom Tillis (R-NC), who at first came out strongly against Trump's national emergency declaration before fully capitulating to Trump and voting to uphold the emergency in an embarrassing flip-flop for the ages.

Advertisement Loading...

Sen. Cory Gardner (R-CO), arguably the most vulnerable Republican incumbent senator facing re-election in 2020, also has no public events listed on his websites nor social media accounts. Gardner was rebuked by his hometown newspaper, which revoked its endorsement of the senator after Gardner's vote to uphold the fake emergency.

Neither does Sen. Martha McSally (R-AZ), who was appointed to fill the Senate vacancy left after John McCain died last August and who faces voters in an election to serve out the remainder of McCain's term in November 2020. McSally's hometown newspaper said the vote could cost her at the ballot box next year.

It's possible these senators are holding events when they're back in their home states. However constituents searching for ways to get face time with their elected officials wouldn't find anything listed publicly online, and instead would have to seek out information from the senators' office.

Hiding from constituents is nothing new. Republicans stopped holding regular town halls in 2017, after they faced fury from constituents angry about the GOP plan to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

Two years later, that trend continues.

It seems Republicans are still scared to face the constituents who have the power to send them to Washington, D.C.

Published with permission of The American Independent Foundation.