Presidential candidate Beto O'Rourke was challenged by a college student during his campaign stop in Pennsylvania and the exchange was caught on video.

O'Rourke was campaigning at Pennsylvania State College when a student asked him a long and very insightful two-part question.

"So my question has to do with campaign finance. You recently pulled in $6.1 million and I commend you," she said, but was interrupted by applause. "You broke all records which i guess is pretty good!"

"But my concern is how much of that comes from a process that is called bundling," she continued. "For those of you who don't know, bundling is a process in which political activists and people in the private sector and lobbyists go to wealthy multi-millionaires and billionaires and basically tell them to give the maximum which is normally anywhere from $2,700 to $5,600 and basically use it to over-inflate a campaigner's first day totals."

She gave an example where only a thousand people giving $5,600 would be reported as a $5.6 million campaign haul.

"Your campaign has not released the number of individual donors you have nor has it released the um average donation," she continued. "Now, I'm not accusing you of that but the fact that your campaign is currently working with a notorious mega bundler Louis Susman gives me a bit of a clue!

"In addition," she added, "when we look on your website, we don't see anything in terms of a solid platform for policy, it's mostly platitudes and your merch store. So I guess two-prong question..."

The audience did not like the tone of her question and began to shout her down, but O'Rourke calmed them and asked them to let her speak.

"Two-prong question," she asked. "One, are you going to release the number of individual donors and their average donor donation because I know your campaign has that data, if it didn't it would mean you are running a very incompetent campaign, and I don't think you are, you seem to have your stuff together mostly, and two, when am I going to get an actually policy from you instead of just platitudes and stories?"

O'Rourke jumped right into the first question, but when the interlocutor demanded to know when he would be providing the documents he promised, he did not respond.

He continued to name a few policies that he had been more concrete about, including criminal justice reform, de-criminalization of marijuana, and universal guaranteed health care.

The student mirrored from CNN's Anderson Cooper, who remarked that O'Rourke's campaign website had a lot of merchandise for sale, but didn't have much in the way of policy solutions.

Watch the contentious question below: